
Congratulations, you survived Y2K. Now you can look
forward to another year of economic and stock market growth, as
amazing as that seems.


But consider these things for a moment.


Within one month the economy will tie the all-time record for
sustained growth, and a month after that it will set a new mark:
107 months since the end of the last recession.


On Wall Street, the bull market in stocks continues to set
records whether you date it from 1990 or 1982 _ if the latter, it's
called a ``super bull market.''


Consumer prices, which were advancing at better than 6 percent
per year in 1990, averaged half that for most of the '90s, and less
than 2 percent in the last three years.


The unemployment rate fell from 7.8 percent in June 1992 to 4.1
percent in November.


Little wonder then that consumer confidence has soared
throughout the decade, and during December, reached the highest
level in 31 years.


Then there are the other ``confidence'' indexes that everybody
loves to watch, since they represent money made or money lost _
namely, the various stock market indexes.


The best known _ the Dow Jones industrial average of 30 blue
chip stocks _ has risen 386 percent since Oct. 11, 1990, the bottom
of the last bear market.


The broader Standard &AMP; Poor's 500 has risen 397 percent and the
Nasdaq composite more than 1,149 percent , clearly reflecting the
high-tech dynamism of the decade.


Indeed, the soaring Nasdaq Stock Market became the market story
of 1999, as the technology-loaded index topped 4,000 for the first
time and gained an unprecedented 86 percent for the year.


New dot-com companies sprouted as entrepreneurs tried to keep
ahead of the demand for Internet services from businesses and
consumers.


If the Internet came into its own in 1999, the computer's
ability to increase productivity while holding hold down labor
costs emerged in the 1980s, after which corporations have invested
heavily in information technology.


That, in fact, is a major explanation for the economy's growth
in the '90s. Other reasons include downsizing, the long-term drop
in interest rates, brisk consumer spending, a business-friendly
Federal Reserve, deregulation and relative stability in the
post-Cold War world.


The bull market, in turn, is a product of sustained economic
growth, unusually strong corporate profit growth, the long-term
decline in inflation, the huge baby boom generation reaching middle
age, and the near-exponential increase in individual investing
through mutual funds and various retirement plans.


None of these fundamentals is expected to change this year,
which means the bull market will continue, most analysts believe.


``I think this market's going to go a long ways,'' says Robert
S. Robbins, market strategist for Robinson-Humphrey in Atlanta. ``I
think it will probably go another five years, maybe longer. If it
does, in another five years, I think the market will double.''


That doesn't mean investors won't have setbacks from time to
time. Robbins attaches about a 50 percent probability to a
correction, or sell-off, of as much as 10 percent in the S&AMP;P 500
sometime this year, but not a bear market _ a drop of 20 percent or
worse.


If anything, most strategists are almost embarrassed to make a
negative forecast, given how many times they have been wrong in the
last 10 years.


First Union analysts said that from 1997 to 1999, ``virtually
all economic forecasts erred by underestimating growth and
overestimating inflation.'' Wall Street analysts, meanwhile, were
too conservative in their forecasts of market performance.


That doesn't mean forecasters have suddenly become cockeyed
optimists, since most forecasts are also laced with words of
caution about 2000.


For one thing, uncertainty about the impact of Y2K clouds most
economic forecasts, according to the First Union analysts.


``The conventional view, which we share, is that 1999 growth was
boosted to some degree by precautionary inventory building and the
final technological fixes of the millennium bug,'' said chief
economist David Orr.


But he said the reverse effect should result in ``more moderate
growth in the first half of 2000.''


The consensus forecast of 16 Wall Street economists surveyed by
Bank of America was that the economy would show a 4.5 percent
annual growth rate in the final quarter of 1999, then drop to 2.1
percent in the first quarter of 2000 before moving slightly higher
in later quarters.


A more serious problem is inflation, which emerged last year as
a serious concern for both the Federal Reserve and the investment
markets _ especially the bond market.


That prompted the Fed to raise short-term interest rates by a
total of three-quarters of a percentage point in three moves _ in
June, August and November.


Many analysts look for more rate boosts in 2000 unless the
economy cools enough to dampen inflationary pressures. The Fed's
fear is that a tight labor market, foreign economic recovery and
rising prices of oil and other commodities could lead to higher
domestic prices as companies raise prices to cover their higher
costs.


The inflation potential of U.S. trade problems, which affect the
value of the dollar, contributes to the Fed's concern about the
inflation outlook. Foreign economic recovery also has the potential
of pressuring the United States to raise interest rates to prevent
an outflow of foreign capital.


The worst-case scenario, which mainstream analysts overwhelming
reject, is a Fed-induced rise in interest rates to a level that
triggers a recession, and that in turn causes a bear market in
stocks.


Many analysts believe the stock market is highly vulnerable to a
sell-off should something like a jump in rates alter the generally
upbeat mood on Wall Street. They say stocks are more overvalued
than ever, and that trading is dangerously concentrated in a narrow
list of big stocks, including those in the technology sector.


Some analysts argue that the stock indexes have been deceptive
for at least two years, steadily rising while most stocks have been
in a ``stealth bear market.'' The S&AMP;P 500 rose 19.5 percent in
1999, but more than half of the 500 stocks declined in value last
year. Measured against their 52-week highs, the carnage was even
worse.


Nevertheless, optimists make a strong case that the end is not
near, for the economy or the bull market, n 2000.


Gary Thayer, chief economist for A.G. Edwards in St. Louis,
looks for ``slower growth with modest inflation.''


Wage gains and the stock market's wealth effect will keep the
economy going, he argues, while electronic commerce and foreign
competition will hold inflation at bay.


``We expect economic growth in 2000 to slow to a 2.6 percent
annual pace, down from the 3.8 percent rate that we expect (for
1999),'' says Thayer. ``We also look for inflation to stabilize in
the 2 percent-to-2.5 percent range.''


The continuation of these solid fundamentals is expected to keep
the bull market alive by boosting corporate profits. Earnings grew
last year much more vigorously than anticipated: from 10.5 percent
in the first quarter to an estimated 20.3 percent in the final
three months.


Most analysts expect some pullback in profit growth, but they
still look for double-digit gains: 19.3 percent in the first
quarter and about 17 percent in the second.


Ralph Acampora, director of technical research for Prudential
Securities, says the Nasdaq composite could reach 5,000 this year,
an increase of 23 percent.


He also said the Dow could reach 13,500 or 14,000 and the S&AMP;P
500 could hit 1,700 or 1,800. If that happens, 2000 would be the
sixth straight year of double-digit gains among the major stock
averages.


Acampora argues that the market maintains its overall strength
through a system of ``rolling corrections,'' in which one sector or
industry group may suffer a sell-off while money continues to flow
into others.


This phenomenon puts a floor beneath the stock indexes even as
large numbers of individual stocks may be tanking by 20 percent or
more, as happened in 1998.


Money managers and investment advisers say that's why investors
should be especially careful of what they buy. Be selective and buy
stocks based on a company's quality of management and track record,
they say. Also, once in the market with a solid portfolio, stay
there until there is a real reason for selling.


Stocks will dip from time to time, and even the strongest will
suffer setbacks in a broad market sell-off. But on balance, based
on what is known and can be reasonably projected, analysts enter
2000 convinced that stocks are a safe investment for some time.


Tom Walker writes for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

