
The hostages called the hijacker dressed all
in black by his nickname, Burger, and within days of commandeering
an Indian Airlines jet, he had the 178 passengers and 11 crew
members joining in for singing games and joke-athons.


The grown-ups listened to him recite Urdu poetry. The children
called him uncle. And a newlywed wife who had a birthday in
captivity was grateful when he bought a shawl from a Nepali hostage
who dealt in them and presented it to her. He was the most
sympathetic of the five hijackers, and when he walked up and down
the aisles holding a gun, he would pause solicitously to chat with
passengers, who were only allowed to go to the bathroom after
asking for permission.


``He was very friendly with everybody,'' said Ipseeta Menon, 25,
who once asked him if he got his nickname because he liked eating
hamburgers. (He did not, and the name remained a mystery.)


Cut off as the hostages were, with even the sunlight shut out by
the drawn window covers, they thought the masked Burger was a nice
guy _ that is until Thursday morning, when he told them that they
would all be killed one by one because the Indian government had
refused to meet the hijackers' demands.


As it turned out, this did not happen. The story had a happy
ending. On Friday the hostages were released after India agreed to
free three militants who, like the hijackers, were opposed to
Indian rule of the Himalayan territory of Kashmir.


But the experience of being trapped on an Airbus for eight days
has left many of the hostages feeling deeply traumatized.


In interviews, they described days of tedium and moments of
terror. They talked of living with the stench of overflowing
toilets and of deciding to stop eating solid foods in an effort to
avoid the dreaded bathrooms.


And some admit to the strange bond they formed with Burger, the
tall, muscular hijacker who was good cop and bad cop all rolled
into one.


``He could change from a very sweet person to one who could
shoot you within seconds,'' said Ravi Kollatt, a former merchant
marine from Cochin. ``I could see it in his eyes. They were smiling
eyes, but then suddenly they would become small.''


The hostages' journey began on Christmas Eve. Flight 814 was
late, but there was a festive air in Katmandu as they waited to
board the plane that would carry them on a hop to New Delhi. Among
them were eight newlywed couples returning from honeymoons in
Nepal. Married in arranged matches, they had only begun to get to
know each other _ but would soon find themselves tested in a way
they had never imagined.


Several passengers said they thought it was a joke when men with
guns yelled that they were hijackers. One described a steward
pushing a drink cart down the aisle who kept moving when one of the
hijackers waved a gun at him. Weren't those pistols and the grenade
just fake weapons, like in the movies?


But reality quickly set in. ``When my husband raised his head,
they shoved it down roughly,'' said Suchana Goel, of Bhopal, a
newlywed. ``We were terrified.''


For the first two days the hijackers were jumpy and brusque,
hostages said. The plane kept taking off and landing in different
places _ the passengers had no idea where. As they jumped from
Amritsar, India, to Lahore, Pakistan, to Dubai in the United Arab
Emirates and finally, on Christmas morning, to Kandahar,
Afghanistan, they were bewildered. Many were blindfolded.


On the harrowing first night, before the plane landed in Dubai,
the hijackers picked out a group of strong-looking men and took
them into the executive-class compartment, whose occupants had all
been moved to economy. Ripen Katyal, 25, a newlywed, was among
them.


``Right in front of us they slashed his throat,'' said K. Keshav
Kannan, who was in Nepal on business for his company, Pepsi. ``They
wanted to make an example.''


Only a few knew what had happened. Katyal's new wife, Rachna,
sitting in economy, had not heard a thing. In Dubai, the hijackers
released a group of 27 women and children and unloaded Katyal's
body. When her husband did not return, Mrs. Katyal got scared.


``Poor thing, she was crying for two days,'' said Mrs. Menon,
herself one of the newlyweds. `` They were avoiding her. Then on
the third day, Burger said to her, ``I'm like your elder brother.
Your husband has been released in Dubai. You should be happy he is
safe and sound.' Rachna never knew he was killed.''


Unaware that the hijackers had murdered Katyal, many passengers
became chummy with Burger once the plane settled in Kandahar.
Though cameras for CNN and BBC were constantly trained on the craft
and television stations in India broadcast news of little else, the
passengers heard nothing.


One day Burger started a round of joke-telling. He began it with
the one about the man in the helicopter who feels cold, asks why
the fan is on, stops the propeller and dies. There was weak
laughter. Then the captain of the jet picked up the thread and told
one, too.


Burger also got them to participate in a singing competition
called antakshri. One passenger would sing part of a song, then the
next would have to start a song with the last word in the previous
song. There was merriment as young people sang Hindi movie tunes.


(MORE)


nn

