
Carolina receiver Patrick Jeffers has been red-hot
lately, after battling injuries through the first half of the
season. In the past four games, he has 28 receptions for 552 yards
and six touchdowns.


His effort paid off Thursday in a new four-year contract with
the Panthers. The former Virginia star who spent two years in
Denver and one in Dallas had been scheduled to become an
unrestricted free agent on March 1.


Jeffers, in his first season with Carolina, had not wanted to
leave the Panthers, but he had worried that the team might not be
able to afford him.


``I've said all along this is where I want to be and if my agent
feels like the offer they make is a fair one, I'd be more than
happy to sign it,'' Jeffers had said before the deal.


Ditka has attitude adjustment


After his team stunned the Cowboys on Christmas Eve, Saints
coach Mike Ditka seems to be friendlier and more confident.


``Did I say that (I'll be back next year)? What a cocky guy,''
Ditka said. ``I just believe I'll be back. There's no revelation to
it. An angel of the Lord didn't come down and say, `You're going to
be back.' I just believe I'm going to be back. I want to be back.
And I'll be back.''


Ditka said he hasn't met with owner Tom Benson to discuss the
future but did admit that he told his players last week that he'll
return.


``I haven't acted any different,'' Ditka said. ``Right now, I
resign myself to the fact that I really believe that I'll be back.
There might have even been a moment where it didn't bother me that
much one way or the other. But now it would bother me, because I
really want to make some people really mad.


``I told my mom a long time ago I'd like to live to be 150. She
said, `Why?' I said I'd like to make the rest of the people mad
that I haven't made mad yet. I want to get a few in this town. So,
coming back would make a few of them mad, you've got to admit
that.''


Arizona coach lobbying for extension


Arizona coach Vince Tobin issued an ultimatum of sorts, despite
the Cardinals' three-game losing streak that knocked them out of
the playoffs.


Tobin, who has one year left on his contract, is publicly
lobbying Cardinals owner Bill Bidwill for an extension.


``The Cardinals have to sit down and (decide), 'What direction
are we going?' '' Tobin said. ``Were the Cardinals moving in the
direction we want to go with me at the helm? If that's so, then
we'll work it out. If they think not, then I'm sure we'll work it
out the other way.''


Tobin seemed to say he would rather be fired than become a
lame-duck coach in 2000. Tobin is 28-38 as a head coach after his
team slipped to 6-9 a year after the franchise's first playoff
berth in 51 years.


``I just think it's hard to coach a football team going into the
last year of your contract,'' he said, ``for your own free agents,
for other people's free agents, your control over your football
team and just the speculation. There was speculation this year,
and, if we went into next year, there would be speculation every
day, every week, on good plays and bad plays, good decisions and
bad decisions. You need to have closure.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

