
The Atlanta Hawks' Lorenzen Wright nearly wept when he
learned about the tragic story of 9-year-old Travis Butler, alone
in a house with his dead mother in the Memphis projects,


``I grew up where he was growing up,'' Wright said. ``I went to
the same school (South Park Elementary) he attended. The idea of
losing your only parent and being so afraid that you would be put
in a home that you don't tell anyone, I could relate to that and be
thankful I have both my parents.''


That's why Wright joined fellow Memphis natives Penny Hardaway
and Elliott Perry in donating $3,000 each to a trust fund for
Perry. Todd Day kicked in another $1,000, bringing the trust fund
for young Butler to $40,000.


``I would like to reach out to him on a personal level,'' Wright
said. The Hawks center runs a summertime basketball camp in his
hometown and wants Travis to attend. ``I think something like that
would allow him to feel better about himself.''


The Butler story hit newspapers a week after Thanksgiving. The
9-year-old's mother, Crystal Wells, 30, a pharmacy school student,
died of complications from a noncancerous carcinoid tumor on Nov.
3, but her body was not discovered by neighbors until Dec. 6.


Fearful after hearing tales about foster care, young Butler went
to school each day as though nothing had happened. He did his own
grocery shopping from money in the house, prepared his own meals,
fixed pizza for his Thanksgiving meal. At the time Wells' body was
found, little Butler was preparing to pay household bills. He
already had written checks, his maternal grandmother said.


Butler is now living in Carthage, Miss. with the grandmother,
Shirley Wilder, and the trust is being administered by the National
Bank of Commerce.


And while Wright and other NBA players from Memphis will get
credit for caring and giving, their involvement probably would not
have happened except for the reaction of the Hawks' vice president
for media relations, Arthur Triche, whose son, Brandon, is about
the same age as Travis Butler.


Triche brought the story to Wright, then contacted Hardaway and
Day through the Phoenix Suns and Perry through the New Jersey Nets.


``One of the saddest stories I've ever encountered,'' Triche
said the day it was published. ``I can't imagine this. We've just
got to find a way to do something for this child.''


Later, he learned that the four Memphis players were eager to
help themselves.


``I think once they heard the story they were as touched as I
was,'' Triche said. ``How could you not open your heart to the
plight of a young boy in that circumstance?''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

