
Bob Beamon always felt like the untouched,
unloved, unwanted child he was raised to believe he was.


Neither the outpouring of affection from an adoring public nor
the love he finally found after four failed marriages could make up
for the neglect and physical abuse he suffered as a child growing
up in South Jamaica, Queens. What Beamon remembers most about his
childhood were the stories his father, James, and his paternal
grandmother, Bessie, who raised him, told him about his mother,
Naomi Brown Beamon. His mother died at age 25 when Beamon was 8
months old.


``They said my mother never held me,'' recalled Beamon, who was
in New York in early December to accept an award from Sports
Illustrated, which cited his record-setting long jump during the
1968 Olympics as one of the 10 greatest sports events of the
century. ``When I was born, they said she left me in the hospital.
Beyond that, nobody talked about my mother or her side of the
family. It was one of those hush-hush things.''


In his recently published autobiography, ``The Man Who Could
Fly'' (Genesis Press), Beamon describes how, at age 35, he finally
summoned the courage to confront his grandmother about a lifetime
of things left unsaid. Only then did he discover he had been lied
to.


Not only had his mother held him, there was visual proof of it.
A black-and-white photograph shows his mother standing on a street
corner holding her son in her arms. His mother, who had
tuberculosis at the time of his birth, died shortly after the
picture was taken.


``The picture was incredible in terms of what I'd heard, that
she never held me,'' Beamon said. ``It was communication with my
mother and I. So when my wife and I were writing this book, things
started to come together and make sense.''


Beamon found out that the secrecy surrounding his mother's life
and the estrangement between the Brown and Beamon families were
brought about because his mother, who had been physically abused by
her husband, became pregnant with Bob when her husband was in
prison. Beamon's biological father was a physician who worked at
the hospital where his mother worked as a nurse's aide. His mother
never told the doctor about the pregnancy.


``She didn't take me home because she was too ill to care for me
and because my daddy had threatened to kill me if she ever brought
me to his house,'' Beamon said. He was sent to live with his
grandmother in Harlem, while his half brother, Andrew, who was
mentally retarded, lived with his mother in Queens.


Bob Beamon had cause to become another one of the countless
poverty-stricken urban youths consumed by the lures of the streets,
drugs or violence. Instead, he rose above circumstance through
sports.


Beamon may have gone to school in what he described as his
grandfather's ``prewar, two-sizes-too-big'' clothes, he may have
gone to bed hungry and he may gone through his young life untouched
by loving arms, but he knew how to jump.


``I could jump higher than the older boys,'' writes Beamon, who
at 6 feet 4 inches was also a talented basketball player. ``Even
when I was in elementary school, everybody always wanted me on
their team.''


As a student at Jamaica High School, Beamon came under the
tutelage of Larry Ellis, the renowned track coach, and was named to
the all-American track and field team as well as the all-city
squad.


In 1965, his senior year, Beamon was ranked second in the long
jump in the United States and received a track-and-field
scholarship to the University of Texas at El Paso. Three years
later, on a humid October afternoon in Mexico City, Beamon soared
through the thin air, landing 29 feet 2{ inches later into a sand
pit of Olympic glory. Mike Powell broke the record in 1991, but
Beamon still holds the Olympic record.


The jump, once deemed by many as the single greatest individual
achievement in sports, seemed so surreal to Beamon, it has taken
years for him to fully appreciate its magnificence.


``So much was going on with the black athletes threatening to
boycott the games and all the stuff in my personal life and the
problems back at UTEP,'' said Beamon, a soft-spoken man with an
acquired flair for fashion.


At the time, Beamon was living through an unhappy marriage to a
former high school girlfriend he believed to be pregnant with his
child _ she was not _ and had lost his athletic scholarship after
he and eight other members of the university's track team boycotted
a meet at Brigham Young University. The team was protesting
references in the Book of Mormon that castigate the black race as
inferior.


What Beamon does remember about Mexico City, beyond the image of
Tommie Smith and John Carlos standing on the awards podium with
black-gloved fists raised above their bowed heads, was that his
high school sweetheart was in the stands cheering him on.


``Even with all the competitions I had been in since I was 17, I
never had a loved one or family member in the stands rooting for
me,'' he wrote. ``Just from that personal point of view, I knew
that this was even more special than I had ever imagined.''


These days life is sweet for Beamon, now 53. He lives in Miami
and is happily married to Milana Walter Beamon, a film producer,
who helped him co-write his book. He has a new job as director of
athletic development at Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton.
His book tour is playing to receptive audiences. And a public
service announcement he filmed for the Children's Court Centennial
Communication Project, a program to commemorate the 100th
anniversary of Juvenile Court that interviews 25 people whose lives
have been changed by judges or other officers of the court, is
being shown across the country.


Nevertheless, he still longs for those lost shared moments of
his childhood and youth. So Beamon, who was not allowed to get
close to his mother's side of the family, is making up for lost
time.


He and his cousin Diane Brown Brisbane, his mother's brother's
daughter, talk often on the telephone. Brisbane was the relative
who located the only surviving print of Beamon and his mother and
attended his book signing in Manhattan in November. He has also
established ties with his great-aunt, Emmie King, who wanted to
raise Beamon and tried, unsuccessfully, to locate him and his
brother, who died in 1993. Beamon later found out that his aunt and
uncle were literally just around the corner.


``When Naomi died, I kept asking about her children and I never
got an answer,'' King recalled. ``Bob shouldn't have had to go
through life thinking he was unwanted because that wasn't the
case.''


On Dec. 2, when Beamon rose from his seat at Madison Square
Garden to accept his award, his wife, Aunt Emmie, her companion,
George Butler, Brisbane and her son, Al, 35, were present in the
audience. This time around, Beamon had family cheering for him.

