
The New York Times said in an editorial on Sunday, Jan. 2:


For two decades, American politics were defined by what David
Stockman, the Reagan-era budget director, memorably proclaimed to
be deficits as far as the eye could see. With the arrival of this
new year, the U.S. economy will shortly break the record set in the
1960s and achieve the longest boom in history. As a result,
political candidates are now debating how to spend surpluses rather
than how to reduce deficits. But the new game can be as tricky as
the old one. The true size of any surplus is debatable. Even its
existence is provisional, depending on yet unrealized spending
cuts. So far the presidential candidates are more interested in
talking about what a surplus might buy than in the painful choices
that lie ahead.


All four major presidential candidates agree that $2 trillion of
a projected $3 trillion in budget surpluses should be used to pay
down the national debt or otherwise set aside for Social Security.
All of them also have ambitious schemes for the remaining $1
trillion.


Vice President Al Gore would use the money for health care,
education, military spending and other initiatives. Former Sen.
Bill Bradley would focus most of it on health. Gov. George W. Bush
would use most of the money for a tax cut and military spending,
and Sen. John McCain would spread it out for spending and tax cuts.


But none of the candidates emphasize what Congress will have to
do to make these dollars materialize. These figures assume that
Congress and the president will agree to steep budget cuts in
domestic and military programs as envisioned in the Budget Act of
1997, with its notoriously tight caps on expenditures. In fact, the
caps from that law have been circumvented in each of the last two
years.


If current spending levels are not cut this year and are instead
allowed to rise at the rate of inflation, the 10-year surplus
shrinks to $250 billion, according to the Congressional Budget
Office. If Congress sets aside as much for ``emergency'' spending
as it has in the last two years, the projected 10-year surplus
would shrink to less than $50 billion. These numbers could improve
later this month, when new economic forecasts are due, but the hard
reality remains. Producing trillion-dollar surpluses will require
cuts in existing domestic programs.


It is true that discretionary domestic spending has been
shrinking. In theory, there ought to be room for the next president
to advocate some increased spending for anti-poverty programs,
schools, environmental improvement, law enforcement and other
areas, without provoking a political firestorm. But the costs of
federal retirement programs and health care are exploding. The
Congressional Budget Office projects that Social Security, Medicare
and Medicaid, now 45 percent of the federal budget, will grow to 65
percent by 2030.


With the Iowa caucuses and New Hampshire primary only a few
weeks away, voters must start demanding that all the presidential
candidates face up to these realities when they talk about using
the surplus for either tax reductions or new health plans. But
voters may turn out to be less interested in these subjects than in
the question of who can keep the economy cooking.


One lesson from the Clinton years is that an expanding economy
can do more than any social program or tax cut to improve the lives
of Americans. An enduring lesson of the Reagan years, of course, is
that it really does take smoke and mirrors to produce tax cuts,
spending initiatives and a balanced budget at the same time.

