
Not all professional sports leagues formed in the past 100 years
made it to the next. While the Women's National Basketball
Association has survived three seasons, its rival, the American
Basketball League, did not. The sports landscape has been littered
with ignominious moments from defunct leagues gone by.


Federal League, 1914-15


The Indianapolis Hoosiers, paced by Benny Kauff's league-leading
.370 batting average, captured the Federal League flag in 1914. The
Hoosiers became the Newark Peps in 1915, the only major league
baseball pennant-winner to move to a new city the following year.


American Professional Football Association, 1920-22


In its first year the league had two rival football teams in
Chicago: the Cardinals and the Tigers. The owners knew there were
only enough fans to support one team, so they decided to play a
game against each other with the provision that the loser had to
leave the city. Only one touchdown was scored that day, by
Cardinals quarterback Paddy Driscoll. The Cards _ forerunners of
the NFL's Arizona Cardinals _ won, 6-3, and the Tigers left town.


American Football League, 1926-27


In 1925, the NFL got its first superstar when Red Grange, the
Galloping Ghost, signed with the Chicago Bears. The next season,
Grange's manager, C.C. (Cash and Carry) Pyle, wanted the Bears to
increase the player's pay. When the Bears' owner, George Halas,
refused, Pyle formed the American Football League with Grange and
his team, the New York Yankees, as its main attraction. The war
between the leagues ended in 1927 when Grange caught his cleats in
the grass and ruined his knee. Without its superstar, the AFL
folded.


American Basketball League, 1925-31


After the Original Celtics had won the ABL title in 1927 and
1928, officials decided the team was too good for the league. They
broke up the squad and sent the players to different teams. Nat
Holman and George ``Horse'' Haggerty, both former Celtics, found
themselves on opposing teams in a tight game. With seconds left,
Haggerty had the ball. Then he heard someone call, ``Hey, Horse!''
It was Holman. Without thinking, Haggerty threw the ball to his old
teammate. Holman took the pass and scored an easy bucket, winning
the game.


All-America Football Conference, 1946-49


In 1946 two African-American players, Woody Strode and Kenny
Washington, signed to play with the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL.
Bill Willis, a fellow African-American, wanted to play pro
football, too, but his only offer was a tryout with the Montreal
Alouettes of the Canadian Football League.


While traveling to the Alouettes' training camp, Willis stopped
to visit his former college coach, Paul Brown, then coach of the
Cleveland Browns of the newly formed AAFC. Brown persuaded Willis
to practice with his team. Willis was so impressive, Brown signed
him immediately. Nine days later, presumably because Brown thought
Willis would need a black roommate on road trips, the team signed
Marion Motley. The Browns won all four AAFC championships and then,
after joining the NFL, won its 1950 title.


National Basketball League, 1937-49


Chuck Connors, a 6-foot-5-inch forward for the Celtics,
splintered a wooden backboard in Boston Arena during warmups with
the Chicago Stags in 1946. A visiting rodeo provided a replacement
backboard so the game could be played. Connors would go on to star
in the TV series ``The Rifleman,'' prompting one former teammate to
say, ``He went from being the worst shot in the East to the best
shot in the West.''


American Basketball Association, 1967-76


The Dallas Chaparrals' owner, Roland Speth, traveled alone to
the expansion draft in New York in 1967 and chose players according
to a list provided by team scouts. What Speth did not realize was
that the players were listed alphabetically, not by talent. So Jim
Burns of Northwestern was drafted ahead of a star player from
Kentucky named Pat Riley.


The San Diego Conquistadors' head coach, Wilt Chamberlain,
skipped three games in the 1973-74 season, one so that he could
attend a book signing of his autobiography and two for unknown
reasons. San Diego finished 37-47.


World Hockey Association, 1972-79


The Calgary Broncos' general manager, Scotty Munro, selected the
Soviet premier, Alexsei Kosygin, in the initial free-agent draft.
Neither the Broncos, who were out of money, nor Kosygin played a
game in the WHA.


World Football League, 1974-75


The Memphis Southmen had a grizzly bear cub as their mascot.
During one game, the cub playfully chewed through the insulation of
a wire lying on the ground; when he got to the core he gave himself
a terrific shock that threw him over on his back and shorted out
the stadium scoreboard for 10 minutes.


The week before the 1975 season finale, the Hawaiians, who
played in Honolulu, asked their players to take pay cuts to save
the franchise. Both quarterbacks refused and quit. Two days before
the game, the team recruited two replacements: Milt Holt, who had
played at Harvard, and Jim Fassel, who had been a player-coach for
the Hawaiians in their first year. Holt was taken from a desk job
at Honolulu City Hall, and Fassel, now the head coach of the
Giants, had been driving a truck in Los Angeles. The Hawaiians lost
to the Southern California Sun, 26-7.


World Team Tennis, 1974-79


Vitas Gerulaitis, star player for the Pittsburgh Triangles in
1974, ordered the public-address announcer at the Civic Arena to
invite the crowd of nearly 11,000 to proceed from a match to his
20th birthday observance at a nearby hotel. Gerulaitis had reserved
the top floor. The result: heavy partying and at least one broken
bathtub.


Jimmy Connors, star of the Baltimore Banners, wondering why his
team was called the Banners: ``Who's Francis Scott Key? I thought
we were named after some guy named Banner.''


In 1979, though not because of the Connors comment, WTT
disbanded. It re-formed in 1981 and still exists, but without the
Banners or the big-name stars.


(MORE)


nn

