
If the Dallas Cowboys reach the NFL playoffs,
they will do it with fear in their hearts and urgency in their
steps, according to the team's most outspoken player.


Deion Sanders has never experienced a week like this. When owner
Jerry Jones challenged 20 veterans in a passionate closed-door
meeting on Monday, the laid-back attitude of an entire franchise
changed. Sanders is among many players who think the Cowboys have
one opportunity to correct a season gone sour.


``That speech should encourage everybody, especially us
million-dollar players,'' the All-Pro cornerback said. ``Something
is seriously wrong with us if that didn't encourage us.''


The message from the chief executive was stern and direct.
Excuses no longer will be accepted for a 7-8 football team that has
wasted countless chances to improve its standing.


Dallas will earn the final slot in the NFC playoffs if it beats
the New York Giants today at Texas Stadium. A loss would humiliate
everyone wearing blue and silver.


The Cowboys think they have more talent than many of the teams
that have beaten them, and that stings everyone in the
organization. Much of the nation has laughed at the Cowboys _
especially after last week's loss to New Orleans _ and Jones showed
his rage during a 20-minute session in his office.


``I had to pray for Jerry afterward,'' Sanders said. ``Let's
just say he used some words that were special.''


``In all the years I've been here, Jerry's never had a meeting
like that,'' quarterback Troy Aikman said.


Whether the Cowboys respond with a victory remains to be seen.
They have blown six fourth-quarter leads this season. They lead the
league in penalties. Unless they correct the mistakes that have
dogged them all year, the 1999 season will be over.


``I took Jerry's speech personally,'' running back Emmitt Smith
said. ``Now it's up to us to do something about it.''


Sanders and Smith understand why Jones took such a harsh stand
Monday. They agree that Dallas has not come close to playing to its
potential. Just last week the Cowboys had five players named to
this season's Pro Bowl, an indication that their cupboard is hardly
bare. By contrast, 7-8 Green Bay _ another team hoping for the last
playoff spot _ will have no one in Hawaii.


Jones said he felt ``foolish'' after losing to the lowly Saints
because he is paying $41.5 million in signing bonuses to players on
a losing team. Jones, a longtime executive in the oil and gas
business, knows when his luck runs dry. For starters, he promised
changes will be made to the roster if the players do not show rapid
improvement.


``We've got to fix this thing,'' Jones said after walking off
the Superdome turf.


At that moment, however, it appeared Dallas had no chance of
making the playoffs. The team's mood brightened considerably Sunday
night when they learned they still had postseason life. If they
beat the Giants, the Cowboys will travel to Minnesota, Tampa Bay or
Washington for a wild-card game next week.


``Where once there was no life, we have a new life,'' Smith
said. ``What we do with that extra life is up to us.''


The Cowboys have victories over Green Bay, Miami and Washington
(twice). But they also have lost games to some of the NFL's worst.
Mental mistakes were blamed for embarrassing losses to
Philadelphia, Arizona and New Orleans.


At least some of their frustration will end if they beat the
Giants.


``This team has been through quite a lot this decade,'' Smith
said. ``This might be a unique story when all is said and done.''


The Cowboys are trying to become the first 8-8 team to reach the
playoffs since the 1991 New York Jets. Failure to reach the
playoffs this season would come with a heavy price.


``If we don't do what we're capable of doing,'' Sanders said,
``it might be the last time a lot of us will be wearing the helmet
with the star.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

