
Only 22 days until the first votes are cast in Iowa, the
chairmen of the Republican and Democratic parties say they are
bracing for a presidential primary season that is so competitive _
and unexpectedly so _ that they have to reach back 40 years to come
up with a comparison.


Yet the entire exercise may be over soon after the public begins
to pay attention. This will be the speediest _ critics say hastiest
_ dash to the nomination ever, because several states, seeking
greater political sway, elbowed their way in by moving up the dates
of their contests.


The rejiggered calendar means the races will go off like a
string of firecrackers, beginning with the caucuses in Iowa on Jan.
24 and the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 1, followed by primaries
in the electoral giants of California, New York and several other
states on March 7.


After a six-week rush of voting _ less than half the National
Football League's regular season schedule _ the nominees to be the
leader of the free world may well be apparent.


As recently as last summer, advisers to the two front-runners,
Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, expressed
few qualms about the truncated schedule. They were so immersed in
constructing what they viewed as organizational juggernauts that
they did not seem particularly alert to threats from within their
ranks. And they anticipated wrapping up their nominations quickly
and tidily so they could turn to the general election.


Instead they now have no choice but to strategize over how the
outcome of one contest could affect the next one.


Bush and Gore are still the favorites; they may well face each
other in November 2000. But now, in an unaccustomed position for
the leading contenders, they are playing catch-up, at least in the
high-profile state of New Hampshire, where polls show that both
contests are too close to call. Gore must contend with an
unanticipated, and threatening, challenge from former Sen. Bill
Bradley of New Jersey, and Bush faces one from Sen. John McCain of
Arizona.


While Gore and Bush are comfortably ahead in national surveys,
their challengers hope that those campaigns become unglued in New
Hampshire _ and never recover. Adding to their credibility, and
political muscle, Bradley and McCain made striking gains in fund
raising near the end of 1999.


``It's going to be an unbelievable six weeks,'' said Ed Rendell,
general chairman of the Democratic National Committee. ``On our
side, you might see ups and downs and twists and turns in an
eight-day period. You will think one of the candidates has the
upper hand and _ bingo! _ he loses the next week.''


Recalling the presidential campaign of 1960, Rendell, who
retires Monday as mayor of Philadelphia, said, ``You've got to go
back to Kennedy and Johnson to find two co-equals who are really
battling head to head. And I don't recall the last primary campaign
when we've had two candidates who are so well known and so well
funded.'' But the truth is, Lyndon B. Johnson was never considered
as much a threat to John F. Kennedy as Bradley is now to Gore.


Jim Nicholson, chairman of the Republican National Committee,
also said this year's campaign reminded him of the high stakes on
both sides in 1960. Even so, Richard M. Nixon never came close to
losing the nomination to Nelson Rockefeller or other rivals, who
were not considered as potent as McCain is this year.


``If you want to include both parties in the calculus, this
might be the most competitive situation since 1960,'' Nicholson
said. ``There's a lot at stake and it's just going to get more
intense.''


Asked to handicap the Republican race, Nicholson, in unusually
candid comments for a party chairman, all but brushed off four
contenders. ``Bush is clearly the front-runner in terms of money,''
he said. ``But Senator McCain is a great candidate who has shown
real skill at retail campaigning in New Hampshire and is a very
authentic American hero. So anything can happen in this thing.''


Nicholson hastened to add that the potential of Steve Forbes,
with millions from his family fortune at his disposal, should not
be disregarded.


After a prelude to 2000 that was hardly sedate _ candidates
piled up millions of dollars in donations and traded jabs
throughout the year _ the contenders are about to enter the most
frenzied, and possibly ferocious, stretch thus far. This week,
candidates will practically move to Iowa and New Hampshire. They
have accelerated their deluge of 30-second television commercials.


And the schedule of successive debates might hearten even
advocates of good government: Democrats will face off in New
Hampshire on Wednesday, followed by Republicans there on Thursday,
Republicans in South Carolina on Friday, and Democrats in Iowa on
Saturday. That accounts for just this week.


``They stick their signs everywhere,'' said Ted Bailey,
describing how politicking _ and cold weather _ have overtaken
Chichester, N.H., where he is a selectman. ``But they're going to
find it hard sticking signs in now, because the ground's frozen.''


The major contenders are also keeping an eye just off center
stage, where a drama is unfolding over who will carry the mantle of
Ross Perot and the Reform Party he founded.


While Pat Buchanan, the conservative commentator, and Donald
Trump, the real estate tycoon, are campaigning most aggressively
and organizing in several states, other possible contenders include
Gov. Jesse Ventura of Minnesota. And few are counting out a
surprise re-emergence of Perot himself.


(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

