
For Peter Warrick, Tuesday night's Sugar Bowl game
represents nothing less than a fight for his legacy at Florida
State.


To put it bluntly: Will Warrick be remembered as the guy who
made a mistake and lost the Heisman Trophy? Or will he be the
player who helped Florida State win its second national
championship?


To Warrick, those will be the stakes when the No. 1 Seminoles
take on No. 2 Virginia Tech at the Super Dome.


``This is my last shot to prove what I can do in college ball,''
said Warrick, a senior from Bradenton, Fla. ``I hope to do
something that people will remember. I want them to remember what I
did on the field _ not how I messed up off the field.''


Warrick should be entering this game as the Heisman Trophy
winner. But those hopes died in October when he and teammate
Laverneous Coles were arrested on theft charges. With help from a
Dillard's cashier, Warrick and Coles paid $21 for more than $400
worth of clothing.


The charge of felony theft was eventually reduced to a
misdemeanor and after sitting out two games, Warrick returned to
the team. He thought that, plus a firestorm of negative press,
would be the extent of his punishment. He was wrong.


At the time of his arrest, the Heisman Trophy was Warrick's to
lose. He did. In fact, he did not get enough votes to warrant a
trip to New York as a finalist.


Then came the most crushing blow of all. At the ESPN College
Football Award show in Orlando on Dec. 9, Warrick sat in stunned
silence as the Biletnikoff Award, which goes to the nation's best
wide receiver, went to Troy Walters of Stanford.


``No disrespect, but I had never heard of Troy Walters,''
Warrick said.


Warrick's teammates were seething after what they viewed as a
snub by the Biletnikoff which, ironically, is named after a Florida
State Hall of Famer and is presented by the Tallahassee Quarterback
Club.


``I didn't like the Heisman Trophy thing, but I understood it,''
said defensive tackle Corey Simon, who was in Orlando for the
announcement. ``But how can anybody in their right mind not vote
Pete as the best wide receiver? I have absolutely no respect for
that award any more.''


Since then, Warrick's teammates have closed ranks, saying that
the punishment has now surpassed the crime.


``Look, the guy made a terrible mistake and he's paid a
tremendous price for it,'' quarterback Chris Weinke said. ``It cost
him the Heisman Trophy. His name has been drug through the mud all
over the country. And the thing is, they just don't know the guy
and very few of the people ripping him have ever bothered to find
out.''


Their feelings for Warrick and his situation run so deep that
last week Florida State's players chose him one of two permanent
team captains.


``That felt good,'' Warrick said. ``I've been around these guys
for a long time. They know me.'' So Tuesday night, Warrick will try
to repair some of the damage the only way he knows how _ by helping
the Seminoles win the last national title of the '90s. ``There's
not a day that goes by that I don't think about winning the
national championship,'' he said. ``We've come close but we still
don't have the ring.''


Tony Barnhart writes for The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

