
On most days, 11-year-old Azamat Malikov
spends at least an hour or two doing what comes naturally to many
people in Kyrgyzstan. He works at memorizing what is said to be the
world's longest epic poem.


One sunny afternoon, Azamat, resplendent in a dark blue velvet
robe, chanted the story of a battle so vividly that he even
frightened a visitor who could speak no Kyrgyz. Azamat rocked to
and fro, waved his arms and changed his expressions wildly to
illustrate the text.


``My grandfather asked me to please learn the Manas epic,''
Azamat said afterward. ``He told me that if I did, I would become a
very good person.''


Scholars who have studied this epic call it as stirring as ``The
Iliad,'' as episodic as ``Don Quixote'' and as rich in moral
guidance as the Gospels. It tells the story of an ancient hero who
fought to establish and defend a homeland for the Kyrgyz people.
His resolute commitment to virtue makes the epic a textbook of
moral values as well as an enthralling story.


It is also the main cultural treasure of the Kyrgyz people, and
has played a central role in their history. Lacking a strong
religious or political tradition, the Kyrgyz use the legend of
Manas to define their collective identity.


It is what binds them together as a people and, some believe,
what has allowed them to survive while other Asian peoples have
vanished into history.


Although the Manas epic is many centuries old, it was first
written down in fragments less than 150 years ago. It is a
quintessentially oral work, passed down across many generations by
Manaschis, masters of recitation who chant it at festivals and
other gatherings. Most of these Manaschis have been men and women
with strong constitutions _ able to go on for hours or days at a
time and often slipping into a kind of trance as they chant.


Because there has never been an authoritative text, each
Manaschi can weave in original lines, and even episodes and
characters. The greatest of them are revered as prodigious creators
in their own right. Over the centuries, they have forged a culture
of memorization that is as strong as any in the world.


Perhaps because the Manas tradition is oral rather than written,
it has proved impossible to suppress. Czarist conquerors and later
the Soviet authorities sought to manipulate its message of Kyrgyz
self-determination. But the tradition is thriving today, thanks in
part to support from the Kyrgyz authorities.


Since Kyrgyzstan emerged from the debris of the Soviet Union in
1991, its educational system has been in ruins. The authorities
have decided to concentrate on an elite of talented children and
have opened up several schools for them. Most of them _ like the
Meerim School in Osh, the second-largest city in Kyrgyzstan _ offer
courses on the Manas legend.


Meerim's pupils are selected from among the gifted and
ambitious. Most come from poor families. Once accepted, some choose
to learn ceramics, computer technology or other skills. But the
group that concentrates on Manas has a special cachet.


``For us Manas is not just about history,'' said the school's
director, Sayrakan Usupova. ``It teaches the importance of being
good. Naturally these kids are excited to be the center of
attention when they perform at weddings and parties. They take
their competitions very seriously.


``But this is not really about show,'' Ms. Usupova said. ``It's
about teaching moral principles for the present day. No child who
studies Manas will ever grow up to be dishonest or negative or
unproductive.''


The eponymous hero of this epic is described as a towering
figure who could uproot any tree and hurl boulders from the heights
of the Tian Shan mountain range. He vowed at age 12 to free his
people from oppression, and lived a noble life until he was
treacherously killed. His burial place is secret, and when anyone
seeking it comes too close, a storm is said to break out that can
only be calmed by reciting the epic.


No one knows when this story was first told. Kyrgyz clans moved
into the territory they now inhabit following epic battles in the
ninth century, and feats performed then may have been the basis for
some episodes. The 300 years that followed proved to be a rich
period for Kyrgyz life and culture. Not only the Manas poem but
also more than a dozen other epics, some of them still performed
today, emerged during this period.


The figure of Manas is not known to be based on any single
individual.


By one count, his life story has been told in more than 60
versions.


Parts of the original text have undoubtedly been lost forever,
but scholars say more than half a million lines survive. That would
make this epic more than 30 times as long as ``The Odyssey.''


No definitive version of the surviving epic exists, but the
government is collecting material and hopes to publish one in the
next few years, first in Kyrgyz, then in Russian and perhaps in
English. But resources here are limited, and even with the help of
the United Nations there has been little progress on plans to
release recordings of Manaschis in performance.


President Askar Akayev, who likes to give visitors a two-volume
English translation of selections from the epic, said in an
interview that he first heard it chanted in his native village when
he was 4 or 5. He added with evident pride that he had personally
heard the late Sayakbai Karalayev, said to have been one of this
century's greatest Manaschis.


``For the Kyrgyz people, Manas is more than an epic,'' Akayev
said. ``It's what the Bible is to Christians. It inspired people in
their hard times.


``Thanks to Manas, this small nation preserved its traditions
and history, and survived to become a country in Central Asia.
Kyrgyzstan can become successful in the 21st century only by
adopting modern technology while at the same time preserving the
moral code from Manas.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

