
The millennium, an idea with overtones ranging from Biblical to
commercial, had swelled recently into a coercive miniculture as the
countdown ticked away and a flood of books, articles, television
specials and studied commentaries by academic, political and
religious leaders reflected upon the last thousand years of human
achievements and missteps, and speculated on the next thousand.


Purists still insist that the millennium will not start until
Jan. 1, 2001, and they are no doubt right. The calendar, at best,
is arbitrary. There were problems from ancient times based on
inaccuracies in measuring the year's duration and its uneven
division into days, weeks and months. By 1582, the spring equinox
was 10 days early, and the days were dropped when the Gregorian
Calendar replaced the old Julian version. While Pope Gregory's
calendar uses the birth of Christ in 1 B.C., as a starting date,
many scholars now suggest that the year was probably closer to 4
B.C.


In any case, as Voltaire noted, history is the lie that
historians agree upon, and the tide of popular opinion has swept
nearly everyone along. And with the climax of celebrations, and
especially when the nines rolled into zeros at midnight and
humanity went ballistic, purists' talk of technicalities was the
last thing anyone wanted to hear.


For doomsayers who had prophecied conflagrations, earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions and other end-of-the-world scenarios (and kept a
weather eye out for UFO rescue ships), the new millennium was
something of a nonevent, although the anxiety prompted by all the
wild predictions of chaos was real enough.


The Book of Revelations, Chapter 20, speaks of a resurrection of
the dead and a judgment day, of sinners cast into a lake of fire
and Christ reigning for a thousand years. But if it was not the
Second Coming of Jesus as foretold in the Bible, there was still a
year to go, or this was the wrong millennium.


And if, as some said, even the idea of a Third Christian
Millennium was a Western conceit in a world where Christians are a
minority, and one that overlooked other calendars calling this 1420
(Muslim) or 5760 (Jewish), it was also true that the world had long
ago come by economic and social necessity to agree upon the Western
calendar for trade, travel and other common purposes.


The millennium, if nothing else, was a celebration of history,
marking human survival after a deadly century of wars, genocide and
revolution that saw the end of colonialism, fascism and communism,
as well as the achievements of the past thousand years _ printing
and widespread literacy; the exploration of the last frontiers on
earth; the first ventures into outer space, the inner mind and the
microscopic universe, and the flowering of democratic government,
and of art, literature, science, technology and communications into
undreamed eminences.


The world on this Millennium Day was still beset with terrible
problems _ with grinding poverty that afflicted a third of its 6
billion inhabitants, with ethnic and national strife, with the
continuing curse of racial and religious bigotries, and with the
exclusion of countless millions from adequate health care,
education, jobs and even such basic needs as shelter and clean
water, not to mention freedoms of speech and political association.


But with a few exceptions _ notably threats of terrorism and
limited wars in the Balkans, Chechnya and other regions _ it was a
world largely at peace, with the apocalyptic threat of nuclear
annihilation receding and new understandings growing between old
enemies in the Middle East, Ireland, South Africa and other
long-troubled areas.


And it was a world on the threshold of a new era _ one that
offered visions of astounding strides in science and technology and
seemed to hold out anew the ancient promises of universal peace and
prosperity, although the only certainty seemed to be that the world
a thousand years from now would be unrecognizable.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


As Dec. 31, 1999, gave way to Jan. 1, 2000, in each time zone at
midnight, with atomic clocks marking it to a millisecond,
celebrants went ecstatic. It began in Fiji and the Kiribati and
Marshall Islands in the Western Pacific (it was 7 a.m., EST Friday)
and moved westward, hour by hour, as the earth turned and 23 more
midnights fell across Australia, Asia, Europe, Africa, the Americas
and back across the Pacific, ending in Samoa at 6 a.m., EST
Saturday.


Islanders in Kiribati welcomed the millennium with the mournful
sounds of a conch shell and with traditional chants and dancing on
the beach of a normally uninhabited coral atoll, dubbed Millennium
Island.


In Japan, which has absorbed many of the trappings of the
Western world while preserving its own cultural and religious
traditions, bells tolled in a Buddhist ritual to dispel evils as
thousands flocked to temples and shrines. In Tokyo, the first of
the world's major cities to mark the new year, people went to
parties and crowds swarmed to bayside events, including rock
concerts and lavish fireworks.


In China, torchbearers in Imperial-era costumes lighted signal
fires on the watch towers of the Great Wall, which snakes 3,000
miles from the Gobi Desert to the North China Sea, and President
Jiang Zemin lighted an eternal flame to greet the new millennium
and pledged a ``great rejuvenation'' by reuniting with Taiwan.


Over Hong Kong Harbor there were brilliant fireworks displays,
and parties abounded, a prelude to the Chinese new year, the Year
of the Dragon, which starts Feb. 5.


(MORE)


nn

