
... about 8,000 square feet.''


Greene's excesses are limited to his cars and his house. He
wears little or no jewelry. He still buys his clothes off the rack.
And he has avoided getting caught up in the Hollywood night life.
For the most part he socializes in the comfort of his own home, the
unofficial official meeting place of HSI athletes.


``I don't like going to clubs. That's not me,'' says Greene,
whose ex-girlfriend delivered his first chiICE GREENE LOOKS TO
BLAZE A TRAIL IN SYDNEY
(For use by New York Times News Service clients)
JASON WHITLOCK
c. 1999 The Kansas City Star


... about 8,000 square feet.''


Greene's excesses are limited to his cars and his house. He
wears little or no jewelry. He still buys his clothes off the rack.
And he has avoided getting caught up in the Hollywood night life.
For the most part he socializes in the comfort of his own home, the
unofficial official meeting place of HSI athletes.


``I don't like going to clubs. That's not me,'' says Greene,
whose ex-girlfriend delivered his first child _ a girl, Ryan _ in
December. ``I'm not in the Hollywood life. I've met Toni Braxton. I
see Vivica Fox all the time, Halle Berry all the time. I've got
pictures with all of them. But as far as dating one of them? Naw,
they want too much money.''


The people who know Greene well say he has not changed since he
was a shy kid who played football and ran track in high school,
never had time for a serious girlfriend and was known as a serial
practical joker.


``You have to realize God has given me this talent for however
long he wants me to have it,'' Greene says. ``It can all be gone
tomorrow. And you know what? I'm going to say, `I'm the same person
I was before I had everything.' '' Beginnings


Jackie Greene delivered baby Maurice at the University of Kansas
Medical Center in Kansas City, Kan., after the worst nine-month
stretch of her life.


``I was sick the whole nine months I carried him,'' Jackie says.
``I wasn't bedridden or anything. I was just totally sick....I
don't think anybody should have been that sick for that long. But
somehow we made it through.


``I guess Maurice was just determined to make it.''


When he arrived, Maurice found he was the baby boy of
working-class parents who already had two sons, Michael and Ernest
Jr., and one daughter, Kelly. Maurice's father works for the Kansas
Department of Corrections. His mother is a supervisor in a garment
factory.


Ernest Sr.'s job required quite a bit of travel. So Jackie
Greene, a Sunday school teacher, ran the house. Maurice grew up
attending the Third Street Church of God in Kansas City, Kan.


He also grew up tagging along to his older brothers' sporting
events. Michael, 35, and now an accountant, was a pretty good
football player. Ernest Jr. was a childhood sprint star, and as a
teen-ager he began working with Kansas City Kansas Community
College track coach Al Hobson. It was at those practices that
Maurice was introduced to sprinting and Hobson. Both would change
his life.


``Maurice would run rabbit for us as a 9-year-old,'' says
Hobson, a retired General Motors employee. ``Ernest would drag
Maurice to practice, and we'd stick Maurice out there 15 to 20
meters, and he thought he could beat them. Maurice always had a
strong mind.''


Under Hobson's tutelage, Greene went on to win three straight
Kansas high school state championships in the 100- and 200-meter
dashes. He was a hot college prospect as both a football player and
a sprinter. But he struggled academically.


``Sports was his life,'' Jackie says. ``He'd just slop in his
homework, throw some things underneath his bed and say, `It's time
for me to go to practice.' ''


Late in Greene's teen-age years, Jackie agreed to raise a
niece's five children. It was a sacrifice she felt she had to make
for her family. Her home became too crowded and too hectic for her
youngest son to live comfortably. Maurice basically moved in with
Hobson and his family.


``Al has been like a father to me,'' Greene says.


Hobson persuaded Greene to give up his dream of becoming a
college football star and pursue a sprint career full time. Greene
enrolled in Park College and Kansas City Kansas Community College
and continued working with Hobson. Greene attended school during
the morning, worked an assortment of odd jobs during the day _ from
walking greyhounds at The Woodlands racetrack to serving Big Macs _
and trained with Hobson in the evening. Sprinting to the top


His decision to follow Hobson's advice didn't pay off in a big
way for a couple of years, until Hobson placed him in the 1995
Texas Relays 100-meter dash, which featured Carl Lewis.


Greene was just 20 at the time. Lewis was still his idol. The
field included several other veteran sprinters. Hobson just hoped
Greene would not get embarrassed and lose confidence.


Greene ran a wind-aided 9.88, beating Lewis by 0.02 and the
second-place runner by 0.01. Greene's previous fastest hundred _
and keep in mind he missed the 1994 season because of a pulled
hamstring _ had been around 10.40.


``He introduced himself to the world at the Texas Relays,''
Hobson says. ``You can talk about wind-aided all you want, but
Maurice beat Carl Lewis that day. And he did it out of lane eight!
People like to act like Maurice came out of nowhere. But he didn't.
He ran 9.88 in 1995. Maurice has been here since 1995.''


The next week Greene backed up his Texas Relays run with a 10.11
at a different meet. Maurice Greene was for real. He was a
legitimate threat to make the 1996 U.S. Olympic team. But an
injured hamstring delayed his coming-out party.


That is the funny thing about track and field: Its margin for
error is the most minuscule in sports. You cannot play hurt in
track. A pulled hamstring, a sprained ankle, and you are done.


Injury may be the only thing that can stop Greene this year as
he runs a gauntlet of meets leading up to the Games. And the pain
of missing the Olympics again would be immeasurable for Greene.


Greene went to the '96 U.S. trials lame. He managed one 10.08
clocking and then faded early in the meet. He attended the Atlanta
Olympics for a couple of days and then left depressed.


``I felt like I should've been there,'' Greene says. ``I
couldn't take it, so I just came home and thought about what I'd
missed.''


He also contemplated ending his working relationship with
Hobson. He had long been intrigued about the idea of working with
John Smith. Hobson had actually introduced Greene to Smith at a
track meet.


MORE

