
Los Angeles' city parties and concerts on New Year's Eve were a
dud of millennial proportions Friday, drawing far smaller crowds of
revelers than expected.


A rare rainstorm coupled with Y2K boredom and uncertainty kept
much of Los Angeles home from the five city parties, and even The
Eagles concert failed to fill the Staples Center and left scalpers
eating high-priced tickets.


At the city's icon, the Hollywood sign, the laser light show and
fireworks displays were nixed. Officials gave contradictory
explanations for why they were canceled and why officials continued
to promote the events until the last minute.


``We're in a very dry season,'' said Deputy Mayor Noelia
Rodriguez, explaining the fireworks cancellations. ``The fire
hazards certainly played into it. The last thing we need is to
torch the Hollywood sign.''


The Federal Aviation Administration told the city two weeks ago
it could not stage a laser light show, according to Riordan
spokeswoman Jessica Copen. But other officials said it was because
the lasers didn't work well on TV and film.


Riordan and Jay Leno were scheduled to throw the switch to light
the signs before a worldwide television audience.


Elsewhere, the rain cut short several party performances.


``It's not exactly what we wanted, because of the rain,'' said
Al Nodal, the city cultural affairs director, as he dodged puddles
at the city's downtown festival. ``It's just sort of spotty.''


Despite that, many partygoers were undaunted, enjoying the line
dancing, skydivers, gospel singers and an array of activities.


City officials said attendance could have reached about 400,000
at the five venues. There was capacity for 15,000 people at any one
time at the Van Nuys Airport, where a daylong crowd of 45,000 was
expected but only a few hundred showed up at any one time.


Parties also were thrown in Crenshaw, Grand Avenue downtown, San
Pedro and the Alameda district.


``San Pedro has been building slowly all day. The Crenshaw is
rolling right now. Alameda has been going full-blast


they're real troupers,'' Nodal said.


At the ``San Fernando Valley Spectacular'' at the Van Nuys
Airport, several hundred people got a jump on New Year's
festivities at the family themed outing featuring mass line
dancing, kids' crafts, carnival rides and music.


About 900 people were in attendance by early evening, officials
said.


``It's really great that this was pulled off for the people of
the city,'' said Carol Brotman, 44, of Northridge.


From noon on, the free city-sponsored event drew a steady stream
of partygoers bundled in ski jackets, scarves and gloves.


The unexpected wet weather kept musicians from taking the stage
and quashed a planned BMX bike jump demonstration.


``Everyone's in a real party spirit,'' said Mary Passantino of
Canyon Country, one of the 500 or so line dancers to mark the
millennium to Dwight Yoakam's ``Fast As You'' in an old National
Guard hanger. ``It's a real nice way for people to get together.''


Bob Levy, who grew up in Encino and now lives in San Jose,
brought his mother, his wife, Judy, and their three children to the
party.


``My favorite thing is the dancing, said 8-year-old Rachel.


Her brothers, 10-year-old Eric and 8-year-old Aaron were busy
slugging it out with long, padded poles in an inflatable gladiator
game.


``This is great,'' Levy said. ``I think the kids will last until
midnight. It's a big enough event.''


Backstage, 10-year-old Christian McDonald and the 40-member
choir from the Church on the Way in Van Nuys were eager to perform.
They were to join choirs at the four other L.A. millennial venues
in singing a prophetic 1899 hymn, ``A Hundred Years From Now.''


``This is real exciting,'' said Christian of Valencia. ``I think
the future is going to change a lot. Pollution is going to stop,
and I think the world is just going to be a better place.''


``Airwolf'' TV star Jan-Michael Vincent, grand marshal of the
Valley spectacular, joined the dancers for a few steps.


``I'm not much of a line dancer, but I sure can do the country
swing,'' Vincent said.


About 40 volunteers joined 85 private security guards and more
than 100 Los Angeles police officers in keeping the event running
smoothly.


Tustin resident Bob Shea drove his wife and four children to the
airport spectacular as a prelude to the Rose Parade.


``Everything you can do on the millennium New Year's Eve is
geared to adults _ dancing, nightclubs _ but this was the best
thing for families,'' said Shea, a former Los Angeles resident.


Organizers had said they wanted to use the sky above Los Angeles
to unify the city and link the five festivals, but the gray and
cloudy weather interfered.


A skywriter wrote ``LA 2000'' over the San Pedro festival about
noon, but gathering clouds covered it. Nodal said the rest of the
``air promenade'' continued as planned, with planes, blimps and
skydivers.


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL 2ND TAKE FOLLOWS.)

