
In a building overlooking the plaza, small groups gathered in
tiny apartments, clinking glasses of rum or dancing to music from
boom boxes as they waited to eat their dinner of pork, rice and
yuca.


``We celebrate with what we have,'' said Roberto Leyva. ``Let
everybody have their own way. Cubans live among brothers.''


He expected that the New Year observance would bring with it
some official declaration about the revolution's challenges after
41 years.


``The comandante will have to talk about the revolution in the
millennium,'' he said. ``For me, this is the best. Here, there are
no assaults, you can walk anywhere. Fidel has created this. If God
exists, that God is Fidel.''


Tourists flowed through the streets, as they do most days,
taking pictures. Although street vendors grouse that the tourists
often pass by looking but not buying, they are a source of
much-needed hard currency. They also bring a curiosity about an
island that is suffused with near-mythic meaning.


``I am a disillusioned old-time Communist,'' said Allesandro
Damiani, an Italian tourist who works for the European Community.
``I wanted to find out if ideology is stronger than climate and
latitude, or the other way around. I found latitude and climate are
stronger.''


Damiani said Cuba's opening up to tourism was inevitable since
the collapse of the Soviet Union, which helped subsidize the
government here.


But he also thought it was jarring to see class distinctions he
thought had vanished with the revolution slowly arise between
Cubans who work in tourism and have access to American dollars and
Cubans who do not and are paid in Cuban pesos.


One of those Cubans who has a few more dollars is Manuel Licea,
a singer who first rose to fame in the 1950s with the island's top
orchestras. Though he is fond of his smokes and rum-tinged
espresso, he is still in fine voice, and has become famous again
through his appearances on the wildly popular ``Buena Vista Social
Club'' and ``Afro-Cuban All Stars'' recordings. Since then, he has
traveled to Europe and the United States, playing the traditional
Cuban music known as son for people who remembered it from decades
past.


``The century began with the son,'' he said. ``It will end with
the son.''


In the 1950s he used to greet the New Year in clubs, serenading
tourists with irresistible guarachas that sent their hearts racing
or dreamy boleros that brought tears. The songs, like one titled
``If You Cook the Way You Walk, I'll Eat the Scraps,'' also helped
ordinary folks suffering under the dictatorship forget their
worries.


This New Year, though he was performing in Mexico, his thoughts
were with easing the animosity between Cubans who have long been
divided since the revolution split families and friends.


``I hope for something miraculous in the millennium,'' he said
during a rehearsal break at the Egrem Studios in Havana a few days
ago. ``I hope the Cubans who are in other countries will reach an
understanding between those who are here and those who are outside.
Music, like sport, is something we can do to help that
understanding. That is my dream. Before I have to go to where we
all have to go, to at least see that for 24 hours. Then I can
die.''

