
Show me my money.


That's what a number of banks and brokerage houses across the
country had feared hearing from crowds of itchy-palmed clients on
the first morning of the year 2000. To show customers that their
money had not vaporized overnight, a few offices stayed open all
night, and many others opened early Saturday morning.


There were, however, few worrywarts to reassure and fewer
panicked withdrawals of cash, according to representatives of the
banks and brokerage houses that opened. In more than a few lonely
branch offices, employees wondered why they had gotten up early and
come to work, only to look at each other.


``How are we going to keep occupied today with our entire staff
in here?'' asked Susan Langdon, manager of the Lincoln Center
branch of Charles Schwab in Manhattan. The discount brokerage firm
opened 300 of its 340 branches across the country Saturday, and the
customer traffic was light, according to Greg Gable, a spokesman
for Charles Schwab in San Francisco.


In the Lincoln Center branch, which opened at 9 a.m. sharp, the
front door had been unlocked for 45 minutes before the first
customer of the new millennium walked in to find Mrs. Langdon and
six other investment advisers eager to calm his nerves. He did not
want to be calmed. He wanted to set up an account to buy high-tech
stocks on line.


So it went across much of the country.


In the Cleveland area, despite an advertising campaign touting
its New Year's Day hours _ along with a $25 cash bonus to new
checking account customers and half-point discount on installment
loans _ Metropolitan Bank &AMP; Trust had only one customer waiting at
its branch in Mayfield Heights when it opened at 11 a.m.


Eleanor Bader, dressed in a short coat with a fur collar,
stopped at the bank to see if her Social Security check had cleared
early, not to verify that her savings account was safe.


``I had no doubts,'' she said about the bank's year 2000
readiness. ``I was just worried about my Social Security check.''


In West Virginia, where 10 branches of the City National Bank
were open all night, customer volume was light and there were no
significant withdrawals of cash, according to Matt Call, executive
vice president.


``The whole point of this is to discourage people from taking
out their money,'' said Call, noting that the plan seemed to have
worked better than anticipated.

