
A development group led by the Fisher real estate
family has won the bidding for one of the most sought after prizes
in New York real estate: nine acres of waterfront land south of the
United Nations.


The Fisher group, which includes the developer Sheldon Solow and
Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, would pay Consolidated Edison up to
about $600 million for the site, although the exact sum depends on
the cost of demolishing the sprawling Waterside Steam Plant, which
sits on part of the property, and the number and size of the
apartment buildings and office towers the city allows to be built
along the East River.


The property consists of four parcels on First Avenue, between
35th and 41st Streets. The developer, like some 20 other bidders
for the land, is hoping to build up to 5 million square feet of
residential and commercial buildings, bordered by an esplanade
along the river.


``It's the only substantial piece of land left in Midtown,''
said Mary Ann Tighe, vice chairman of Insignia/ESG, a real estate
company. ``For both Sheldon and the Fishers, this is their moment
to make a huge statement.''


The Fisher group overcame an unexpected, last-minute offer from
the second-place finisher, Mortimer B. Zuckerman, chairman of
Boston Properties, who was joined by the developers Leonard Litwin
and Donald Zucker. But after some intense negotiating last Tuesday
afternoon, the Fishers were able to hang on to the prize.


According to the losing bidders and other real estate
executives, the Fisher team is expected to begin formal contract
negotiations with Con Ed Monday, a process that could go on for
weeks. Con Ed is not expected to announce a deal until the
agreement is presented to the company's directors later this month.
Con Ed is also seeking approval from the Public Service Commission.


Robert P. Stelben, the treasurer and executive vice president of
Con Ed who oversaw the 14-month auction of the property, declined
on Saturday to discuss the sale other than to say: ``When we have a
winner, we'll announce it. But we don't have a winner.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


Even after a contract is signed, it may be more than three years
before the developer can begin building on the site. Under an
agreement with the state commission, Con Ed must expand the
generating capacity of its steam plant on 14th Street to offset the
loss of Waterside, which could take three years.


At the same time, the developer must go through the city's
lengthy and often contentious environmental and land use review
process. A coalition of local apartment owners and civic groups has
already said that it wants to see a master plan for the entire nine
acres.


Richard Kahan, a leader of the coalition, said the group does
not want a densely packed development whose tall towers would loom
over the United Nations or the surrounding neighborhood.


The bidding for the property drew so many buyers and was
especially fierce because the land represented the last large tract
available in Manhattan. Its waterfront location made it ideally
suited for residential development and, with corporate tenants
running out of space, it may make a good office site as well.

