
``Thus says the Lord, set your house in order!''


_ Isaiah 38.1


If Robert Kraft is a man seeking counsel this morning as his
team prepares to unravel for the last time this season, he does not
need to turn to Jerry Jones for it. He can turn to the Old
Testament instead, which frankly is a considerably more reliable
source of advice and inspiration than the Dallas Cowboys' sly owner
ever will be.


The prophet Isaiah never ran a football team, but then his is a
higher power and his advice to the Patriots' beleaguered owner is
clear. If he does not set his house in order by making the hardest
of decisions _ firing incompetent people he likes personally _ what
will follow long ago was described in other pages of the same book
from which Isaiah spoke to so many church-goers.


``Let him not trust in emptiness, deceiving himself; for
emptiness will be his recompense.'' _ Job 15.31


Empty is the Patriots' locker room this morning. Empty of hope,
empty of trust, empty of faith, empty of answers, empty of the
confidence brought by victory. Win or lose Sunday against the
Baltimore Ravens, Kraft's football team is in disarray, beaten down
by three years of rudderless leadership and blind trust in men who
have failed him.


The players know better than anyone how far they are from what
they seemed to be four years ago when they unexpectedly marched to
the Super Bowl. Far from it on the field. Farther from it on the
sideline. Farthest from it of all in the front office.


They have no faith anymore. No faith in the substitute teacher
who has been trying his best to lead them but was not up to the
task. And no faith in the backstabber who has been selecting less
and less fruitful talent for him to coach every year while
undermining him time and again with those players.


After three years of good cheer and bad losses, The Terminator
suddenly appeared with a whistle around his neck on Wednesday and
suspended a guy who long ago may have deserved it, but he suspended
him for catching the flu.


Of all Terry Glenn's transgressions, catching the flu was the
worst reason for him to be sent to the sideline, yet only when he
had a temperature of 102 did Carroll decide to flex his muscle.
When he did, the reaction of Glenn's teammates was to wander from
the team's practice facility on Wednesday like lost sheep in search
of Little Bo Peep, broken men who knew Glenn deserved to be stood
up to long ago, but well aware Carroll's action came too late and
for the most absurd of transgressions.


They also knew that although Carroll seldom has had the stomach
for such discipline, his hands also were tied by personnel director
Bobby Grier, who all but adopted Glenn and several other players
after Bill Parcells left town. What this led to was a final act of
frustration by Carroll, while Grier refused to say if he supported
it or not.


That is not leadership. That is helplessness, final acts of
self-destruction by two men sinking as if weights were tied to
their feet.


Above Carroll sat Grier, once a silent man but now one striking
out at the coaches beneath him to try and save his own skin. As one
of those assistants said last week, ``The rats are deserting the
ship now.''


Grier's silence often has been mistaken for wisdom by Kraft,
although the two are not the same. Now, after three years of
picking the groceries, he has infected his team with a terminal
case of botulism.


This is no longer a team with young talent. It is a team falling
apart, age overcoming some of its best players in critical areas,
with few signs that the men behind them are dangerous anywhere but
at a party.


Kraft will be told differently this week, as he tries to sort
out the mess he has helped create. He will be told to listen only
to the men whose jobs are on the line. He will be assured and
reassured that his team is not what it appears _ one in steady
decline _ but rather one that has been unlucky, two missed field
goals from this year's playoffs.


He will be told that by Carroll while Grier tries to reassure
him that there is talent here, the same thing he said last week as
he ran from microphone to microphone declaring there was enough
talent to win in New England if his coaches played the younger
players. He went on to say he wanted only to be judged by his
record.


And so he shall be.


Since Grier first reached big-time college football as an
assistant coach on an 0-11 Boston College team in 1978, he has
spent his life either at BC, in various capacities with the
Patriots, or for one season as the offensive coordinator at
Northwestern.


Here is the aggregate record of the teams with which he has been
associated: 145-185.


Since Carroll arrived in Foxborough and Grier took over the
personnel department, Kraft's football team has gone from the Super
Bowl, to 1 point from making the AFC Championship Game, to out of
the playoffs in one game, to out of the playoffs before the
playoffs begin.


Carroll's teams are 11-29 against teams with winning records
when he has been the head coach, a winning percentage of .275
against the kind of teams that make the playoffs.


Grier and Carroll have screamed for the truth to be told time
and again as if somehow it has now, and so there it is. The truth.
The sad truth told not by words but by the numbers.


This is no one's fault, of course. Merely an accident. Bad luck.
Injuries. Acts of God and absences of tender mercies.


Kraft can believe that if he wants, or he can recall another
philosopher king he once knew, one he doesn't like much anymore but
one he grudgingly acknowledged once to be ``the greatest coach of
modern times.'' That coach, Parcells, loved to say, ``In
professional sports, you are what you are. Whatever you finish,
that's what you are. If you're 1-15, you're a 1-15 team. If you're
2-14, you're 2-14, no better, no worse. You can look in the
brochure and see that the team is 5-9 but it only lost six games by
a total of 9 points. You follow me? The reason the team is 5-9 is
because it wasn't any good in close games. With all those sports PR
guys, the implication is that the team just ran into some bad luck,
really should have finished 9-5. That isn't the way it is in my
mind. If you're 2-14, you're 2-14.''


Kraft won't find that quote in the Bible, but he carries it
somewhere inside him because he heard it often enough. Much as he
might hate to do it, he needs to hear it once more. If he heeds
those words and ignores others that are more self-serving, the rest
of what he has to do will be clear to him.


So now what?


If Kraft changes his management team, where is he likely to
head? That is the million-dollar question, and who knows what his
final answer will be?


No one, but if he's smart he'll turn first to a guy he wanted to
hire when this all began three years ago.


He'll turn to Bill Belichick, the Jets' assistant head coach and
defensive coordinator and a man Kraft got along well with until
Belichick defected to New York with Parcells and began beating the
Patriots' brains in three years ago.


Belichick is 4-2 against the Patriots' offense and he has pushed
and trapped Drew Bledsoe into some of the worst performances of his
career. Ending his time with the Jets would be addition by
subtraction for the Patriots, but there are other reasons for Kraft
to give him a second chance as a head coach.


The first is that according to sources familiar with his
contract, Belichick has an out clause that will go into effect for
a brief period after the Jets are sold to Cablevision mogul Chuck
Dolan. That means Kraft could not be forced to hand over
compensation of any sort to the Jets for hiring him and perhaps
explains why this week Parcells declared he would not stand in the
way of Belichick getting a head coaching job.


Belichick reportedly turned down even considering similar
opportunities with Oakland, Chicago, and Kansas City last year in
part because he has a contract that guarantees he will replace
Parcells when the Tuna finally leaves the sideline. But he also has
told friends he is only interested in taking over a competitive
team.


The two he had in mind were Washington and New England because
both have talented young quarterbacks and owners willing to spend
to the cap limit and beyond to win. The organization would have to
be rebuilt here for Belichick to take over, but he could use his
leverage as arguably the leading available candidate to bring in
his own people as both coaches and in personnel.


Belichick always got along with Kraft, which remains a key to
survival for any head coach, and Bledsoe often has praised him
during the years he has been trying to find ways to beat his
defenses.


Just as important, Belichick reportedly has learned from his
public relations gaffes in Cleveland, mistakes that ultimately
doomed him more than anything his Browns did on the field.


Because of those factors, Belichick is the leading candidate on
Kraft's list, although he is not the only one. Word is St. Louis
offensive coordinator Mike Martz is not on Kraft's list, which
probably means his name is just below Belichick's, but there is one
problem there. Because the Patriots were in the Super Bowl the year
Parcells quit, Kraft did not get to even look for a replacement
until the top candidates and many of the best assistants had been
hired.


Picking at him


Here's one last cautionary note to Kraft before he makes his
final decision. Bengals owner Mike Brown declared this week he
would not make head coach Bruce Coslet or his staff ``the
scapegoat'' for a team that is 4-11 entering Sunday's final game.
He said Coslet and his staff had done a good job of coaching and
motivating the Bengals despite the fact Coslet has the worst
winning percentage of any active NFL coach, never has beaten a team
with a winning record on the road since he took over Oct. 21, 1996,
and leads the losingest team of the decade. Brown mistakenly called
this loyalty. Star wide receiver Carl Pickens said he couldn't
believe it when he heard the news because ``Bruce has never had a
winning record anywhere.'' After a closed-door session in which
Brown may have threatened to suspend Pickens without his $265,000
weekly paycheck, the chastened receiver apologized through the
Bengals' PR department, saying, ``Contrary to what I said earlier
today, I believe this team can be a winner next year if we all pull
together, suport one another, and keep a positive attitude.'' . . .
One NFC personnel director looked up his scouting report on Chris
Canty Thursday. ``We had him rated 5.42,'' he said. ``That's a
fourth-round pick. I couldn't believe he went 29th.'' . . . Glenn
isn't the only guy who doesn't learn from his mistakes. Steelers
safety Lee Flowers was fined $7,500 for punching Carolina tight end
Wesley Walls following a hit on an incomplete pass. Flowers at
first said he was sorry. Then he apologized to any kids who were
Steeler fans and might have witnessed it. Then he stuck his foot in
his mouth. ``I don't want to send the wrong message to the younger
kids who love the Steelers and everything, but to be honest, if I
had to do it all over, I'd do the same thing,'' Flowers said.
``That's just how I play. It was foolish. I put the team in a bad
position. We could have lost the game. In that aspect, you have to
pick and choose to do stupid things like that and that was the
wrong time to do it.'' . . . The unlikely rise of Ray Lucas from
unknown special teams player in New England to a starting
quarterback in New York has been only slightly more remarkable than
his rise to the elite club of Parcells Guys. It is obvious Lucas
has become one of them and he has a theory on how that happened:
``Probably because when he told me to do something, you don't ask
questions,'' Lucas said. ``You kill yourself trying even if you
can't do it. If you put 150 percent behind it, you know, he kind of
respects that. Especially if you're a quarterback. I think Coach
has a tendency to think of quarterbacks as being soft a little bit.
I'm not saying that we are or anything but when you take a kid from
college who is a quarterback and you tell him to run down on
special teams, run into the wedge, and you do it and knock yourself
out, then get up and go back down and do it again, I think you have
a mutual respect for each other.''


Cross him off


If you hear Marty Schottenheimer's name on the Patriots'
shopping list (if there is one), don't count on it. Anyone who
signs Schottenheimer as their head coach will be forced to
compensate the Kansas City Chiefs, who are still paying him.
Schottenheimer has said he doesn't want to coach next year and
Chiefs president Carl Peterson has made clear he will seek draft
picks if someone does . . . Here's an assessment of Bledsoe's
problems by a recently retired NFL offensive coordinator with a
long track record of producing high-powered offenses. ``Drew
Bledsoe and Jeff George have the most ability to throw the football
of any quarterbacks in the league,'' he said. ``But quarterbacks
are only as good as the guys around them. Look at Steve Young when
he was at Tampa. He didn't look anything like Steve Young in San
Francisco. Drew is one of the two or three best quarterbacks in the
league, although you wouldn't know it off of this year. If you told
me Drew was going to have the kind of second half he's had I would
have told you no way, but I'll tell you this, too. There's been an
erosion of talent there. I told people before the season they could
go 12-4 but it was more likely they'd be what they are right now.
When a great quarterback goes down the way Drew has it's usually
because the team around him isn't very good. Then it snowballs from
there. You lose a little confidence and then you try and make a few
too many plays and then you're throwing it too quick and it all
compounds itself. But Drew will end up being the player he's always
been. This last half-season is not the kind of quarterback he is or
the kind he will be.'' . . . Remember James B. Orthwein? The former
owner of the Patriots just found out bringing pro football to St.
Louis may cost him $6.25 million. That's what the IRS says he owes
in back taxes from 1994, the year he thought he took a
``charitable'' deduction of $17 million for giving a charity formed
to help bring pro football back to St. Louis 6,500 shares of stock
in what is now the Trans World Dome. According to the IRS, the
75-year-old beer heir overvalued the stock, claiming it was worth
$22.25 million when the IRS says it's worth $5.24 million. See you
back in court, Orthwein says . . . Although the Jaguars have the
best record in the AFC at 13-2, the Titans may be the conference's
best team if the Colts aren't. They've made that point by twice
beating the Jaguars silly. After three straight 8-8 years they
finally have lived up to their potential for the simplest of
reasons, according to Pro Bowl running back Eddie George. ``We got
tired of being a mediocre team and wanted to make that next move
forward,'' he said. ``It was either going to get worse or it was
going to get better. We decided we wanted to get better.'' Remember
the old ``NY'' logo on the Giants' helmets? Word is it's coming
back next season.

