
After independence came to both nations in 1962, the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters. People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other, something that had never happened in
either country.


In Rwanda, that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him. His death in a
plane crash in April 1994, in which the Burundian president also
died, set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis.


Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi. There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon.


``It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence,'' Ms. Des Forges said.


Still, these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged. The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust, Ms.
Des Forges said, is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda, she added, the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders.


In Burundi, Jan van Eck, a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town, said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict, Nelson Mandela,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country,
South Africa.


Oddly, van Eck pointed out, the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence. In
Burundi, for example, so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew. ``They always said: Hang all
the people who committed crimes, or shoot them,'' van Eck said.
``But now there is a realization that there might be too many.''

