
Well, we survived.


If you remember back to the 1900s, it was touch and go. Or so it
seemed. People feared something called Y2K. Terrorists abounded.
Others thought time would expire with a bang.


Then there was a silent majority secretly hoping for a kind of
inverse Y2K, a time-as-panacea where rather than all life's
conveniences going haywire, all of life's little annoyances, from
telemarketers to catalog profusion, would mysteriously clear up. It
would be, as the joke goes, like playing country and western music
backward: You'd get out of jail. Your dog would come back to life.
Your wife would return. Your pickup would run smoothly.


We just can't seem to let the turning of the clock alone. Gerald
Celente, the editor of Trends Journal in Rhinebeck, said it was
part of what he called the ``Narcissistic '90s'' where everything
had to be a big statement, like ``big cars, big houses and big
mouths.''


He said this last week while widely promoting his ``Top 10
Trends of the 21st Century,'' which included a new millennium
religion, an Internet-based political revolution and other Big
Ideas. Celente hurriedly excused himself, saying, ``I've got MSNBC,
Fox, CNN, a lot of things.'' But he first imparted this cautionary
note: ``By nature, the future is foreseeably unforeseeable.''


Who could argue? Or even understand?


Some perspective was found in a most unlikely place. At a
day-care center for the elderly in Mount Kisco called My Second
Home, there were people like Hilda Hiller, 83, who have spent a lot
of time watching time tick by.


``We go year by year,'' Ms. Hiller said. ``Day by day. It sneaks
up on you. You plan for one season and then the next, and they roll
into each other.''


Ms. Hiller, wearing a red sweatshirt that said ``Am I Cool or
What?'' with a picture of a snowman in sunglasses, acknowledges
that it will be difficult to get her head around living in another
century. ``I've been with one so long, it's hard to think about
being in a different one,'' she said.


Big deal, says Eleanor Sponheimer, who is 95 and less than
overwhelmed by the big moment. ``It happens all the time,'' she
said. ``Time is going. Time changes.''


Ms. Sponheimer, it should be pointed out, is not some naysayer.
She has seized a few opportunities in her time, graduating from
college at age 66, getting a master's degree in English at 72 and
then teaching for a few years in Danbury, Conn.


``Of course, I always look forward to things,'' Ms. Sponheimer
said. ``I think that's human nature.''


But it can be a struggle, especially now with the whole world
seemingly bent on hurtling forward. At the elderly center, you can
feel the tug between the hazy future and the memory of all that has
gone before.


Angela La Grassa embodies it.


A spirited woman of 82, her eye-catching purple dress and
matching shoes are a statement. At the center's Millennium Lunch on
Thursday, her friends want her to sing a favorite song. But she
isn't in the mood. Her husband died several months ago.


She pulls a picture from her pocketbook of her wedding in 1937.
They were a stunning couple, their faces pressed close together.
She was a seamstress in the garment district; he was a tailor. And
they danced. ``You heard of the Roseland?'' she asked. ``That was
our second home.''


She wants to be happy so she lets her friends talk her into
making the moment special. She stands and she sings perfectly in
Italian, her foot tapping and her eyes growing brighter. The song
is by her father, who was a musician, and when she finishes, she
sings it in English.


``Darling, you are my first love, you are my love forever,'' she
sings. ``You are mine forever, from now till eternity.''


Ms. La Grassa sits down to applause and the celebration of the
future continues.


At one point they talk about what they would put in a time
capsule. A Bible. An encyclopedia. A Hopalong Cassidy episode,
someone says. A clock, another suggests.


Why a clock?


``To show that time goes on,'' said Rita Lehman.


To which a weak voice somewhere in the room added: ``With or
without us.''

