
In 1995 Akayev convened regional leaders and other dignitaries
for a lavish celebration of the 1,000th anniversary of the Manas
epic. The date was purely symbolic, and the expense left a bad
taste in a country where most people's living standards have
plummeted since the fall of Communism.


During his speech at the celebration, Akayev said that everyone
in Kyrgyzstan should adhere to the seven basic principles of Manas.
This raised some eyebrows, since no one had ever heard of such
principles. It later turned out that the president himself had
divined them.


He listed them as national unity; a generous and tolerant
humanism; friendship and cooperation among nations; harmony with
nature; patriotism; hard work and education; and ``strengthening
and defense of the Kyrgyz state system.''


These principles are now being taught in Kyrgyz schools. They
have become a kind of official study guide for the epic, reminding
young people of the lessons they should learn from it. In effect
Akayev has made this epic the main source of spiritual guidance for
his reborn nation.


``People should have beliefs to shape their lives around,'' said
Beksultan Jakiev, a poet and playwright who runs the government
agency devoted to supporting the Manas epic. ``Given our
traditions, it's logical that this should be where people's ethical
base begins.''


At least two active Manaschis, both in their 70s, are
acknowledged as current masters. More are likely to emerge in
future generations.


But some people fear that by turning the epic into a kind of
ideology, Akayev risks cheapening it.


``The president has chosen Manas as the state ideal of
Kyrgyzstan,'' said Alexander Kim, a newspaper editor in Bishkek,
the Kyrgyz capital. ``He can't use Islamic or Christian or Marxist
principles, so he artificially created these seven Manas
principles.


``This is a work of huge cultural and historical importance, but
when it's pressed onto people, that naturally produces resistance.
I personally like to read and study Manas, but I resist when I feel
that I'm being forced to do it.''


A larger-than-life equestrian statue of Manas, flanked by his
parents, dominates one of the central plazas in Bishkek. On the
four corners of the plaza are busts of great Manaschis of the past.


Young people who pass by seem interested in the epic and even
proud of it.


One of them, Jyldyz Mambetova, 23, said she considered early
Manaschis to have been ``the first rappers.'' She first heard the
epic from her grandmother and now reads sections of it whenever she
can.


``I never knew the Kyrgyz language could be so rich and
expressive,'' Ms. Mambetova said. ``There are so many words I
didn't know. And the stories aren't just exciting. Each one of them
has a moral point. Not many people realize what great cultural
wealth this is.''

