
Beneath the cacophony of exploding fireworks, there was music
and dancing around the world on Friday night as entertainers of
every stripe, and their fans, set about proving that art, if not
eternal (who knows?), at least provides a worthy human tribute to
the last, and the next, 1,000 years.


Yes, there was a disappointment here and there. The Javits
Convention Center extravaganza in Manhattan, with the headliners
Andrea Bocelli, Aretha Franklin and Sting, was canceled, a casualty
of poor ticket sales. And in Jerusalem, a performance of Handel's
``Messiah'' was canceled as well, after a rabbinical ban on public
celebrations that would violate the Sabbath.


But from Egypt and the pyramids in Giza, where the passage of a
millennial moment is old hat (this is the sixth) and 50,000 people
attended a new opera by Jean-Michel Jarre, a French composer of New
Age electronic music; to Cambodia and the ancient temple at Angkor
Wat, where traditional ballet dancers performed in the company of
2,000 prayer-offering Buddhist monks; to Rio de Janeiro, where 3
million samba dancers packed Copacabana Beach; to Berlin, where 60
bands played on 10 stages for a three-mile-long party that
stretched across the once divided city; to Istanbul, where in
Taksim Square, the Turkish band Athena rocked the casbah; to Las
Vegas, where Bette Midler and Barbra Streisand made diva lovers
swoon, the new era clicked over to a sometimes hopeful, sometimes
wistful but generally joyful noise.


In New York, where the 24-hour celebration in Times Square
saluted the cultures of the world in hourly performances that
reflected the year 2000's incremental arrival around the globe,
Billy Joel, a hometown boy (well, O.K, a Long Island boy) rang in
the occasion at Madison Square Garden with a nostalgic medley of
his best-known pop ballads.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


``I wrote this for my first ex-wife,'' said Joel, beginning a
rendition of ``Just the Way You Are.'' His show infused good
feelings with wry melancholy, as evidenced by a particularly
yearning version of ``New York State of Mind'' and even the
dolorous opening measures of Beethoven's ``Moonlight'' Sonata.


The atmosphere of pleasant familiarity was repeated, albeit on a
smaller scale, in clubs around the city, as it doubtless was in
cities everywhere.


In Sunnyside, N.Y., on a stretch of Queens Boulevard where halal
meat markets, Turkish grocers and taquerias sit side by side and
the newsstand sells papers in eight languages, Avenging Disco
Godfather, a five-piece Celtic rock band, made its weekly
appearance at Tailors Hall. In the one-room pub with a roaring fire
and a candlelit chandelier, 75 regulars gathered for an Irish new
year. The band covered classics by the Beatles and Janis Joplin
with a lilting Irish skew.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


Meanwhile, in the distinctly less intimate Florida Everglades,
80,000 people gathered for a midnight-to-dawn concert by the rock
band Phish on 500 acres on the Big Cypress Seminole Indian
Reservation, home to a tribe that first had contact with European
explorers half a millennium ago.


Amid oak, cypress and palm trees, the party included hot-air
balloons, two Ferris wheels and a ballet troupe, not to mention a
handful of nudists and men on stilts. Many in the crowd had
traveled from around the country to hear the band, which has
achieved the kind of cult following that once adhered to the
Grateful Dead.


Last summer, Chicago commissioned a millennium line dance, the
``milly,'' sort of a Midwestern macarena, from a local
choreographer, Harrison McEldowney. Set to a tune by another
Chicagoan, Wade Hubbard, it was danced just before midnight Friday
by the 3,500 celebrants at the McCormick Place Lakeside Center for
a dinner presided over by Mayor Richard M. Daley.


After midnight, the milly gave way to a more conventional boogie
_ and in the end, a series of conga lines, with Maggie Daley, the
mayor's wife, leading one.


In Las Vegas, in the 20th time zone to enter the new year,
Barbra Streisand gave a rare performance at the MGM Grand, the same
place she last appeared six years ago, when the hotel opened.


Then, an anxious Ms. Streisand took the stage for the first time
in 20 years. This time, appearing confident and excited, she sang
to a sold-out house of 13,000 people and repeatedly brought them to
their feet during the 2{-hour show. They all carried flashlights
they had been given as they entered _ in case the power failed,
which it didn't.


At the stroke of midnight, silver, white and gold confetti
dropped in the arena as Ms. Streisand sang her final number _
``People,'' of course.


Nowhere was there an extravaganza to match ``The Twelve Dreams
of the Sun,'' a three-hour song cycle staged as an opera, with more
than 1,000 musicians, dancers and singers and based on an ancient
Egyptian myth about the daily dusk-to-dawn journey of the sun and
the gifts it bestows on humanity during its passage: time,
protection, wisdom, eternity, fidelity, memory, courage, space,
innocence, celebration, purity and freedom.


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


The anthemic work by Jarre melded electronic music with Western
jazz and Arabic rhythms and melodies, and the music and dancing
were augmented by a spectacular laser show against the backdrop of
the pyramids and the great Sahara.


``I hope the new millennium will witness international
understanding,'' Jarre told the crowd.

