
As significant as its resources, Algeria fills a long stretch of
the southern Mediterranean, and thus is of compelling military and
political significance. And what happens is Algeria is of profound
significance to many of America's key allies in Western Europe.
Algiers is only an overnight ferry journey from Marseilles and even
closer to Spain, allowing Algeria's enfeebled economy to send at
least 3 million Algerians to Europe as immigrant workers in recent
years.


And then there is the war, and how it may have led to Ressam
driving off that ferry in Washington state. In this, perhaps more
than anything else, Algeria matters to Americans these days.


In the history of modern Islamic radicalism, two countries have
played pivotal roles _ Iran toward one end of the so-called
``crescent'' of Muslim nations that reaches from Morocco and
Mauritania in the west to Afghanistan and Pakistan in the east, and
Algeria toward the other end.


Twenty years ago Iran mesmerized the world with its mullahs'
revolution, with its seizure of U.S. diplomats and their embassy in
Tehran and, later, with the religious decree that urged the killing
of the novelist Salman Rushdie. Algeria, in 1992, lit fires of
equal intensity among Islamic radicals when its secular government
called parliamentary elections, the first more-or-less free ones in
the country's history, but canceled them at the last minute when an
Islamic party, the Islamic Salvation Front, was on the verge of
victory. The army generals had thought canceling the elections was
a good idea; their reward was the rise of the G.I.A., a breakaway
from the Islamic Salvation Front. Rather than try again for a
generally moderate form of Islamic government, this group espoused
worldwide holy war, going well beyond the Salvation Front
prescriptions.


The conflict that resulted brought to Algeria a ghastliness that
has been stunning, even by the standards of a country that knew
extraordinary savagery, on both the French and the Algerian sides,
during the independence war. The GIA, propagating among its
fighters the belief that the triumph of Islam justifies the killing
of anybody who does not actively support them, has gone into
villages and towns and slaughtered hundreds of civilians at a time,
often by cutting throats.


The army has responded in kind, setting up militias called
``Patriotes'' and other shadowy units; these are believed to have
taken a leaf from France's counter-insurgency tactics in the 1950s,
when ``rogue'' units set up to look like fighters of the
independence guerrillas went about massacring villagers. Several
thousand people have disappeared after being arrested by the army
and police, and cemeteries in Algiers and elsewhere are strewn with
gravestones carrying the sinister marking ``X Algerien,'' often
meaning that the person buried there was killed in custody and
buried anonymously.


From this background have sprung faceless battalions of the GIA
in Europe, and from among them, investigators believe, came Ressam.
So if he is another kind of ``X Algerien'' to Americans, it may be
time to strip away that anonymity, to learn more about him and his
country and their tragedies.


Six decades ago, a U.S. general in Room 1101 at the St. George's
Hotel learned at first hand why Algeria mattered; it is a lesson
that it may be time to relearn.

