
Nadelmann has advised the campaign for putting medicinal
marijuana on state ballots, which is spearheaded by a group calling
itself Americans for Medical Rights, with no mention of marijuana.
The campaign's director, Bill Zimmerman, explained, ``You pick the
name with a view toward winning support for the organization.''


Not all critics of government drug policy want to make illicit
drugs legal. Some assert that prohibition has not stopped drug use.
Others say that money would be better spent treating addicts who
commit crimes rather than locking them up.


Nadelmann wants to enlist such people in his cause of repealing
all penalties for drug use. ``What we reformers do is to use these
coalitions on one issue to educate our allies about the broader
implications of the drug war,'' he said.


Rob Stewart, a senior policy analyst for the Drug Policy
Foundation, another group in Washington supported by Soros, said
that lifting criminal penalties for marijuana use would be
sufficient. Writing in the group's newsletter, he explained,
``decriminalization makes the point that adults should not be
arrested for using marijuana as they would use a martini.''


Stewart described the Drug Policy Foundation as ``agnostic''
about other illicit drugs. But its founder, Arnold S. Trebach, told
journalists in 1997 that everything from cocaine and heroin to
steroids should be freely available.


Nadelmann objects to stigmatizing recreational drug use.
``People shall not be discriminated against based on the substances
they consume,'' he said. ``The extension of the notion of equality
is going to have to include drug users.''


The American Civil Liberties Union also endorses the right to
consume drugs. Ira Glasser, its director, said this year, ``The
ACLU's position is basically that criminal prohibition is
inappropriate in matters that involve a person's own behavior.''


Glasser is also chairman of the Drug Policy Foundation. Holding
both posts, he said, poses no conflict of interest.


Nadelmann said that a fresh initiative on medicinal marijuana
would be voted on next year in Colorado, where an earlier
referendum was declared illegal, and in Nevada, where the proposal
must be approved twice. Other states that have passed such
initiatives, he said, would be encouraged to get involved in
producing and distributing marijuana for medicinal purposes.

