
Had enough of the ``end of the century'' carpet bombing of
recent weeks? Let's look forward instead. Assuming I live to be 146
years old (hopefully they'll update this little pencil drawing of
my big head by then), this is what the column should look like 100
years from Sunday.


Jan. 2, 2100 . . .


Good morning New England sports fans. As we enter a new century,
it's a good time to examine the current state of the Red Sox,
Patriots, Celtics, and Bruins.


Red Sox


Boston's American League baseball entry is the first team in pro
sports to go 182 years without winning a championship. There were
several near misses in the 21st century when the Sox lost 11 World
Series, all in the seventh game.


``I really thought we were going to do it in the last century,''
said J.J. Harrington, great-grandson of John Harrington, the last
link to the Thomas Yawkey era.


The Harringtons have been trustees of the Yawkey Foundation for
almost 110 years and J.J. says he plans to sell the team when it
will be most beneficial to the Yawkey Trust. ``I know that's what
Jean Yawkey would have wanted me to do,'' said J.J.


The Sox are hoping that the 2100 season will be the one in which
they'll snap the Curse of the Bambino. They're also hoping to open
their new Fenway Park. The ``Save Fenway'' zealots successfully
preserved the original, 188-year-old Fenway for the entire 21st
century, but the Sox finally have acquired the last of the acreage
they need to build the new park.


Two nights ago _ under cover of darkness in the middle of New
Year's Eve celebrations _ the Sox announced their annual ticket
price increase. Bleachers will go for $850 a pop this year.


Patriots


As the Patriots enter a new century, there is turmoil on the
field, off the field, and in the front office. And there is traffic
on Route 1, despite the 16 special access roads that were part of
the new stadium built at the start of the last century. One new
access road goes directly from Kraft Stadium to the State Police
barracks and Patriots players have been issued EZ Passes for this
road.


The Patriots finish their 2099-2100 season today with a home
game against the Jets. Dating back to November 1999, New England
has lost 201 consecutive games to the Jets.


The Patriots are still owned by the Kraft family, which kept the
team from moving out of New England at least 40 times in the last
century.


``We turned down offers from Hartford, Providence, Los Angeles,
Houston, Nashua, Banff, you name it,'' said J.J. Kraft, who serves
as owner, head coach, and general manager of the Patriots. ``My
family's legacy in the community is what's important to me. Oh, did
I mention we turned down an offer from Hartford?''


Kraft said he thought the Patriots could upgrade through the
draft this year. ``We've still got some extra picks left from the
Jets and I've got my eye on some nifty press corners in the Big
East this year,'' said J.J., who plans to oversee his 17 cousins
and uncles in the Patriots war room on draft day.


Celtics


There are now 49 retired Celtic numbers in the Old New Garden
rafters (it's rumored Cedric Maxwell might finally get the honor
this year), but still no championship banners in the last 114
years.


Longtime coach Rick Pitino never won a championship in Boston,
but is still revered for leading the Celtics into the 21st century.
Pitino left a legacy of banks, books, and wellness centers in his
trail. And it was his regime that led to the installation of
polygraph machines at every coach's press conference. No one ever
will forget when he reinstated franchise icon Red Auerbach as club
president back in 2001.


Team owner J.J. Gaston, also known as ``Thanks Great-Great
Granddad,'' said, ``We'd have won a couple dozen more flags if Len
Bias hadn't died. The league never compensated us for that pick and
they've been putting the screws to us ever since.''


Bruins


Ho hum. Bruins fans continue to fill the Old New Garden,
settling for annual one-and-out playoff appearances. Owner J.J.
Jacobs, the latest in a long line of hot dog men from Buffalo, is
more concerned with beer cups than Stanley Cups.


Joe Thornton and Co. almost delivered a Stanley Cup to Boston
after the turn of the century, but the team dissolved in a hail of
arbitrations and holdouts. Harry Sinden made the agents cry and the
Bruins saw a window of opportunity slam shut.


It was the same for the rest of the 21st century. The Black and
Gold made it to the Cup finals four times, but lost to teams with
higher payrolls. A recording of Rene Rancourt singing both anthems
still is played before every game.


That's the way it goes in Boston sports. Nothing ever changes.
Just when you think the Red Sox have reversed the Curse, they lose
to the Yankees again. Just when you think the Patriots have
achieved NFL respectability, they revert to the laughingstock days
of Billy Sullivan and Clive Rush.


But you know what? . . . I really think 2100 could be the year
for the Red Sox.

