
Until the beginning of the 20th century, the coverage of sports
in newspapers, except for the occasional heavyweight title fight or
a local football or baseball game, was little more than an
afterthought. Then, with increasing leisure time for readers to
both play and watch, sports grew more important to life and
lifestyle. Editors caught on, and sportswriting began to flourish.


Following is a list of seven sports columnists _ in roughly
chronological order _ who have arguably had the greatest impact on
their profession as both reporters and writers. There have been
numerous other distinguished sports journalists in the last 100
years _ from Charles Dryden to Frank Graham to Shirley Povich _ but
space dictates that the list be limited.


Those included here range from Ring Lardner, who began writing
about baseball in 1906, to Jim Murray, who wrote his sports column
nearly up to the day he died, in 1998. Lardner, Damon Runyon and
Grantland Rice were giants for the first half of the century. Red
Smith, Jimmy Cannon, Dick Young and Murray were prominent in the
second half.


Grantland Rice (1880-1954)


Rice was generally considered the best-known sportswriter of his
generation. He read widely and brought a certain literate quality
to sportswriting that hadn't quite been there before. He began
writing for The Nashville News in 1901, after graduation from
Vanderbilt. He later wrote for The New York Mail and The New York
Tribune. In 1930 he began his popular syndicated sports column,
``The Spotlight.'' Of the two so-called schools of sportswriting in
the early part of the century _ the skeptical ``Aw Nuts'' writers
versus the more romantic ``Gee Whiz'' writers _ Rice was clearly in
the latter group.


He wrote perhaps the most famous opening paragraph in
sportswriting history. It appeared on Oct. 19, 1924, as a lead to
his report on the Notre Dame-Army football game, won by Notre Dame,
and which starred the Fighting Irish backfield: ``Outlined against
a blue-gray October sky, the Four Horsemen rode again. In dramatic
lore they are known as Famine, Pestilence, Destruction, and Death.
These are only aliases. Their real names are Stuhldreher, Miller,
Crowley and Layden.''


Ring Lardner (1885-1933)


Lardner began his career as a sportswriter for The South Bend
(Ind.) Times, but made his greatest impact in newspapers as the
``Wake of the News'' sports columnist for The Chicago Tribune. His
literary fame, however, rests primarily on his short stories, such
as ``Alibi Ike'' and ``You Know Me Al.'' His inventions in language
and perspective also enlivened his sports columns.


From a column in 1910 in which he assumes the role of a
spectator for a Chicago White Sox-Philadelphia Athletics game:


``On my right sat a gent who knew something, and he soon gave
evidence of the fact. Morris Rath opened the Sox attack with a safe
bunt. He was nailed at second when Lord missed his swing on a hit
and run.


`` `Stealing second with nobody out,' remarked the guy who
knows. `And the papers call him a brainy ballplayer. If he had good
sense, he'd trade all his brains for a little bit of ability.'''


Damon Runyon (1884-1946)


He began writing for newspapers when he was 12 years old. He
worked for newspapers in Pueblo, Colo., Colorado Springs, Denver,
San Francisco and became one of the country's star reporters _ and
sports columnists _ with The New York American. He covered wars,
murder trials and World Series with equal distinction. Like
Lardner, it is Runyon's short stories that enlarged his fame. His
``Runyonesque'' characters live on in the musical ``Guys and
Dolls,'' adapted from his short stories.


From the lead in a column from the 1930 Kentucky Derby:


``Say, have they turned the pages


Back to the past once more?


Back to the racin' ages


An' a Derby out of the yore?


Say, don'te I'm daffy,


Ain't that the same ol' grin?


Why it's that handy


Guy named Sande,


Bootin' a winner in!''


Jimmy Cannon (1909-1973)


He was born in New York and grew up in Greenwich Village. He
wrote for several New York newspapers, covered the city and worked
as a war correspondent, but in 1946 he began his syndicated sports
column for The New York Post. He later moved on to The
Journal-American. His rich prose made him one of the most
distinctive columnists of the century, but he may have been best
known for the occasional column, ``Nobody Asked Me, But. ... ''


Following are some lines over the years from ``Nobody Asked Me,
But. ... '':


``It's almost impossible for a girl to be homely with a gardenia
in her hair.'' ... ``I've never seen a circus clown I thought was
funny.'' ... ``I can't ever remember staying for the end of a movie
in which the actors wore togas.'' ... ``The trouble with the big
leagues is that there aren't enough big leaguers.''


Red Smith (1905-1982)


Born Walter Wellesley Smith, he worked for newspapers in
Milwaukee, St. Louis and Philadelphia before being hired in 1945 by
The New York Herald Tribune. He became the most widely syndicated
sports columnist of his generation. Smith joined The New York Times
in 1971, and won the Pulitzer Prize for Distinguished Commentary in
1976 at age 70. His Pulitzer citation praised his humor and
humanitarianism, as well as ``the erudition, the literary quality,
the vitality and freshness of viewpoint'' of his columns.


On the final day of the 1951 season, the Dodgers needed a
victory to tie for the National League pennant. It was the bottom
of the 12th inning at Shibe Park and it was getting dark. The
Phillies had the bases loaded and two out. Eddie Waitkus smashed a
drive toward center field. Jackie Robinson, wrote Smith, ``flings
himself headlong at right angles to the flight of the ball, for an
instant his body is suspended in midair, then somehow the
outstretched glove intercepts the ball inches off the ground. He
falls heavily, the crash drives an elbow into his side, he
collapses. ... stretched at full length in the insubstantial
twilight, the unconquerable doing the impossible.''


(MORE)


nn

