
Texas' off-season of discontent began when the final
gun sounded at Saturday's Southwestern Bell Cotton Bowl, sealing a
27-6 loss to former Southwest Conference rival Arkansas.


While the 24th-ranked Razorbacks walked away from the
much-heralded reunion with their first bowl victory in 15 years and
a handful of Cotton Bowl records, the 14th-ranked Longhorns left
with less desirable souvenirs. Among them:


A three-game losing streak to close the season for the first
time since 1984.


A school record for fewest rushing yards in a game (minus-27).


A stretch of 10 consecutive quarters without an offensive
touchdown.


A season-high eight sacks allowed.


A sprained left knee for quarterback Major Applewhite, the Big
12's offensive player of the year, that will be re-examined Monday
or Tuesday to determine if surgery is needed.


Factor in the public-relations black eye from four player
suspensions announced on the eve of the game and the recruiting
implications of losing to an aggressive raider of Texas-based
talent and it's easy to see why Texas coach Mack Brown summed up
Saturday as ``a bad day at the ranch.''


Texas players, who arrived in Dallas with designs on recording a
victory that could jump-start a national championship run in 2000,
spent crunch time pointing fingers at one another for missed
assignments as the Razorbacks outscored the Longhorns, 24-3, over
the final 21 minutes.


``We started laughing at them,'' said Arkansas defensive end
Sacha Lancaster, a San Antonio native. ``Frustration set in, and
they just didn't hold their poise and confidence like they should
have. They started bickering with each other ... and doing a lot of
finger-pointing (after missed blocks).


``They weren't out of the game until that happened. But that was
like throwing gasoline on a fire. Everything just snowballed on
them, and we took advantage of everything they gave us.''


Brown, who last saw his players score an offensive touchdown in
the second quarter of a 20-16 loss to Texas A&AMP;M on Nov. 26,
described his offense as ``inept.'' Texas averaged 2.9 yards per
play and, for the first time in school history, posted negative
rushing yards. The previous low had been 6, set during the team's
last outing, a 22-6 loss to Nebraska in the Big 12 title game.


``When you can't run the ball, you can't protect the passer.
When you can't protect, you can't throw it or do a real good job at
anything,'' Brown said. ``Their defense was the biggest part of the
ball game. Their guys whipped our guys on offense.''


Yet the Longhorns remained within striking distance until a
12-minute stretch of the second half. Arkansas scored touchdowns on
drives of 97 and 86 yards. The drives were sandwiched around a
Texas drive for a field goal. The Longhorns (9-5) settled for three
points after losing 5 yards on three snaps following a
first-and-goal at the Arkansas 1-yard line.


The momentum derived from those three drives allowed Arkansas to
turn a 3-3 deadlock into a 17-6 cakewalk. It began when Razorbacks
quarterback Clint Stoerner connected with Anthony Lucas for 47
yards on a third-and-12 play from the Arkansas 1-yard line.
Stoerner ended the drive by connecting on 4-of-4 passes for 99
yards, including a 30-yard strike to tailback Cedric Cobbs for the
game's first touchdown.


After the Razorbacks turned away Texas' best chance to score a
touchdown, Arkansas responded with a seven-play, 86-yard march that
ended with Michael Jenkins' 42-yard sprint to the end zone. Texas
never regrouped, running nine plays and losing 2 yards on its next
two possessions while watching Arkansas extend its lead to 27-6
with scoring drives of 37 and 38 yards.


``They played harder than we did. They wanted it more than we
did,'' said Texas quarterback Chris Simms, who completed 9-of-18
passes for 91 yards in relief of Applewhite. ``Their engine was
running at 100 percent the whole game, and ours only went for about
21/2 quarters. That's something we need to work on next year.''


Now, the Longhorns have eight months to tune their engine before
trying to break a 10-quarter touchdown drought. Arkansas, on the
other hand, will have eight months to reflect on a dream conclusion
to an up-and-down season.


``I love the way our team came together,'' said Arkansas coach
Houston Nutt, whose squad earned its first postseason victory since
the 1985 Holiday Bowl. ``Very few Arkansas teams have beaten Texas.
To beat Texas in the Cotton Bowl is something our team and fans
won't forget.''


Rest assured, Texas fans won't forget, either. Their team will
be the one carrying the Cotton Bowl baggage throughout the
off-season. nn

