
Despite a few sputters and glitches, the world's computers
appear to have survived the Year 2000 rollover without major
problems _ and with humanity's faith in technology intact, at least
for another day.


As clocks passed midnight around the world, there were a flurry
of reports of apparently minor prob- lems: a timing device at a
electric plant in Wisconsin jumped ahead 35 days, but it was
quickly reset; a monitoring system at a Japanese nuclear plant
malfunctioned, but it did not affect the operation of the reactor;
in Australia, ticketing ma- chines on some buses jammed.


The technology failures with L greater impact were a result of
crowding _ circuits jammed when too many people tried to make
cellu- lar phone calls in Japan, New Zea- land and elsewhere _
instead of computer software that could not fathom the year 2000.


Yet the day arrived without the kind of catastrophic problems
once feared, like widespread power failures or planes crashing. The
computers of the U.S. power grid and air-traffic control system
rolled over to the New Year just past 7 p.m. Eastern time, which is
midnight Greenwich Mean Time, and things went without a hitch.


``I've never felt there was any significant chance the United
States would have any problem in its infrastructure,'' said John A.
Koskinen, chairman of the President's Council on Year 2000
Conversion. But he cautioned against complacency in the United
States and around the world. ``There are likely to be some glitches
along the way,'' he said.


The real test, experts say, will come in the days and weeks
ahead as people return to work, as factories, offices and stores
begin normal operations. ``To look at midnight as the main event
would be a mistake,'' said David Cassano, general manager of IBM's
Year 2000 program. ``We'll really start to find out where we stand
in the first weeks of January as businesses run their systems for
the first time.''


Still, expectations about the severity of the Year 2000 problem
have been scaled back sharply in recent months. The prospect of
computer failures cascading destructively across the world economy
was taken as a serious threat not long ago. But most analysts now
regard such warnings as exaggerated.


Instead, computer specialists are now watching mainly for a rash
of small, but fixable, glitches in computer programs related to the
Year 2000 problem. These problems, most analysts say, should amount
to an economic headache, not a serious illness _ though there are a
few analysts who say that a recession early this year is still
possible.


Yet around the world, fears about Y2K, as the computer problem
is known, were the exception. As he withdrew a few hundred dollars
from an automated teller machine in Rome on Friday, Federico
Pacifici, 44, said: ``I have faith in technology. I don't think
normal people will have any problem.''


In Japan, the reaction was not quite so relaxed, but there was
no evidence of Year 2000 panic. Strolling through Tokyo's Ginza
district last night, Masao Ito, 66, observed, ``I was a bit worried
about Y2K, but I didn't think it would be a lasting problem, so I
wasn't terribly concerned.''


Japanese are accustomed to stockpiling basic goods as a
precaution against earthquakes, and the government had recommended
that citizens have extra goods on hand in case of Year 2000
breakdowns. Masato Takahashi, a student, said he had put away
enough water and food for a week. ``I'm not expecting anything
major,'' he said. ``I just thought there might be some problem.''


In the isolated cases of panicky reactions, the explanation
seemed more cultural than technological. In rural Thailand, for
example, the government said farmers and villagers had been
withdrawing cash from banks and clearing out food markets because
of Year 2000 fears. ``It doesn't make sense,'' said Kitti
Patpongpaibul, deputy governor of the Bank of Thailand. ``Almost
none of these people own credit cards or computers.''


Astrologers in the Thai countryside have apparently been
spreading dire Year 2000 predictions.


Globally, the more common sentiment seemed to be that of
Spaniards. Surveys have found that Spaniards are largely
unconcerned by the computer problem, known as ``Effecto 2000'' in
Spain, and 90 percent said they had made no special preparations.
``There's been no panic buying here,'' said Carlos Lizana, the
manager of a Supersol supermarket in Madrid.


If the economic fallout is minimal from the Year 2000 problem,
it will be largely because many governments and corporations
eventually listened to the dire warnings of Year 2000 readiness
advocates. And they invested more than $250 billion worldwide in
finding and fixing the problem.


The U.S. government alone spent $8.4 billion to fix the glitches
in the computers that handle everything from sending out Social
Security checks to tracking airplanes with the Federal Aviation
Administration's air-traffic control system. The government's
efforts accelerated sharply after Koskinen became the head of the
administration's Year 2000 program in February 1998.


Companies may have been slow to start _ an estimated 90 percent
of corporate fix-it spending has occurred since 1997 _ but once
they began they invested heavily to tackle their Year 2000
problems. Citigroup, for example, spent roughly $950 million to get
its banks, securities trading desks and insurance operations ready
for the Year 2000 rollover.


``There have been massive investments made to address the Y2K
issue and those investments will mean that the most severe problems
should be avoided,'' said Lou Marcoccio, the Year 2000 research
director for the Gartner Group, a computer consulting and market
research firm.


The Year 2000 problem has proved so costly to try to fix because
it has been a painstaking task for thousands of people worldwide,
searching through billions of lines of programming code, much of it
decades old. The problem dates back to before the 1960s. Back then,
storage space on disks was scarce and costly, so programmers
routinely omitted the first two digits in year dates. The danger is
that computers will fail to interpret the ``00'' date as 2000, and
shut off or malfunction.


BC-Y2K-ROUNDUP-2NDTAKE-NYT
UNDATED: or malfunction.


Around the world, the Year 2000 rollover has meant that much of
the computer industry is on around-the-clock duty, watching for
problems and ready to fix ones that do crop up. It was a quiet
watch Friday.


From her desk in Hewlett-Packard's Year 2000 center in Palo
Alto, Calif., Kathy Hahn filed her first status report at 3:45 a.m.
Like the reports she filed afterward, it was a green light: The
company's field office in Auckland, New Zealand, reported that
there were no apparent problems plaguing the company's computer
systems at night.


For Ms. Hahn, director of Hewlett-Packard's Year 2000 planning,
Friday's lack of problems were a rewarding finish to nearly three
years of hard work in preparation. ``It feels like I've been
pregnant for two and a half years,'' she said. ``I'm feeling a
great sense of relief.''


Edward Yardeni, a leading Wall Street economist, said it was
much too early to relax about the Year 2000 problem. Yet even he is
revising his earlier dark warnings.


In the summer of 1997, Yardeni warned that the computer problem
could be the catalyst for a recession as severe as the 1974-75
downturn in the aftermath of the first oil shock. But he has done
some rethinking recently. ``It's certainly not going to be as bad
as I thought it would be,'' said Yardeni, chief economist of
Deutsche Bank Securities.


Yardeni still thinks it is likely there will be a recession in
the first half of 2000 but says it will be a brief, shallow
economic dip.


Other analysts do not go that far, but they caution against
being too encouraged by the first-day reports. ``The real test is
coming in the days and weeks ahead, and I think there is a good
chance the world's going to have a digital hangover for the three
to six months,'' said Gary Beach, publisher of CIO Magazine, who
has testified before Congress on the Year 2000 issue.

