
At the turn of a new century, when there is so
much time spent reliving the past, the Florida State football
program can look across the line of scrimmage at Nokia Sugar Bowl
opponent Virginia Tech and get a glimpse of history.


Its own.


The No. 1-ranked Seminoles vs. the No. 2 Hokies could be big
brother vs. little brother.


You know how it is. He wants to walk like you and talk like you.
He wants to dress like you and act like you and, yes, eventually
even screw up enough courage to take a whack at you.


Which is precisely what will happen Tuesday night inside the
roaring, boiling caldron of noise at the Superdome.


``We think we're ready,'' says Virginia Tech's All-American
defensive end and Lombardi Award winner Corey Moore.


Ready for more than just a long-shot Hail Mary attempt at an
upset. Ready to line up and compete evenly. Ready to follow in the
footsteps of the Seminoles. Ready to show a college football world
that spent most of 1999 questioning Virginia Tech's credentials
that a new year, a new era, a new major contender has arrived.


``I'm very aware of what they've done,'' says Florida State
coach Bobby Bowden. ``I think there is a pretty good comparison of
Virginia Tech's program to ours.


``I've been here 24 years and (Tech head coach) Frank Beamer has
been there, what, 10 or 11 years? I'd say he has their program
where we were at about the same time. He's done it very much the
same way.''


Beamer has been in charge of the Hokies for 13 years. But who's
counting? Especially when the only number that matters is No. 1.


Florida State breaks through


And nobody knows better than Bowden what it means for a program
that has been climbing steadily up the rankings to finally get that
opportunity to reach the top rung on the ladder.


It was in 1987, Bowden's 12th season in Tallahassee, Fla., when
the Seminoles took the big step up to the elite level. Florida
State had finished seven of the previous 11 seasons in the Top 25,
but then began a streak of 12 top-five finishes, including a
national title won at the 1994 Orange Bowl.


So who says history can't repeat itself?


Along come the Hokies out of Blacksburg, Va., making their
seventh straight bowl appearance and destined to finish in the Top
25 rankings for the sixth time in seven years. What's more,
Virginia Tech has used the talents of redshirt freshman quarterback
Michael Vick to make the big leap.


Just a year ago, it was regarded as an upset to beat Alabama in
the Music City Bowl, and now the Hokies are mere 5{-point underdogs
to the blue-blooded Seminoles with the national championship on the
line.


From little-known to 11-0. From outsiders to outstanding.


Just like Florida State. For the Seminoles, in a way, it is like
trying to run from their shadow. Or reflection in the mirror. Or
that annoying little brother.


``Florida State's program under Bobby Bowden and level of
consistency is exactly where we're trying to reach,'' Beamer says.
``We've been working hard to get up onto the national level for a
long time and we have built toward that level steadily. Only eight
schools can say they've been to a bowl game for the past seven
seasons.


``I'm so proud of our consistency. I think that's a key to
Florida State's reputation. I truly believe we have everything at
Virginia Tech that it takes to play at that high level every year.
We've got a great state for football, we have great facilities and
play in a great conference. I don't see why Virginia Tech should
not be able to play at a top level every year.''


Virginia Tech on the verge


Beamer credits the Big East Conference, its TV contracts and its
Bowl Championship Series tie-in as key ingredients in the rise of
the Hokies to this shot at glory. But just as critical has been his
team's ability to deliver. In 1995, the unheralded Hokies smashed
Texas 28-10 in the Sugar Bowl to complete a hello-look-at-us 10-2
season and have not backslid since.


BYU was a one-year wonder as an elite-level team. Not so with
Virginia Tech.


``When we came here and beat Texas, it was important that it was
a national team that we played, a good team,'' Beamer says. ``When
we were able to beat them, I thought people really began to look at
us a little differently.


``I think in order to become the kind of program that Florida
State is now, what you do is just continue taking steps. Sometimes
it's little steps and sometimes it's big steps. The idea and the
goal is to become them.''


The way to do it is to beat them.


If you're the Seminoles, you have to wonder, and maybe worry, if
the little brother isn't so little anymore.

