
Always and forever a shooter, Brett Hull took aim again last
week, this time with his second most reliable weapon: his tongue.


Hull, now with 601 goals and inching closer to breaking his
father's career total of 610, said in a conference call Thursday
that ``the game isn't a whole bunch of fun to play anymore'' and
that he wishes the Lords of the Boards would make the moves
necessary to bring back the game's offense.


``I come to the rink every day,'' said the glib Hull, the NHL's
top goal scorer of the '90s (494 after a pair in the Dallas Stars'
5-4 victory over Anaheim Friday night) , ``hoping that it will
change back to the way it was.''


Once was the time, and not long ago, that virtually every team
in the league had a scorer or two who averaged better than a point
per game. One hundred-point scorers were commonplace. Sometimes a
dozen or more shooters totaled 100 points in a season. Witness: the
No. 10 scorer in 1995-96, Sergei Fedorov, finished 39-68_107, and
that was 54 points off Mario Lemieux's league-leading mark.


However, in the last three seasons, the 100-point plateau has
been broken only six times _ twice by Jaromir Jagr, twice by Teemu
Selanne, and once each by Peter Forsberg and Lemieux.


As midseason approaches in the first week of January, Jagr looks
like the only certainty to get 100 again, with Owen Nolan and maybe
Mark Recchi and Jeremy Roenick flirting with what has become the
game's invisible ceiling. As of Thursday morning, only 11 players
league-wide averaged a point-per-game or more.


Asked what change he might make to get the scoring kick started,
Hull said he felt the change had to be more philosophical than
fundamental.


``It's the chip-in, chip-out, the dump-in, dump-out,'' said
Hull, describing the dull, metronomic approach most clubs have
adopted in recent seasons. ``No one drop-passes. But I don't see
that you've got to make changes _ just go back to the way it was.
The rink's the same dimension. We have the same lines. It was wide
open before, and things were just fine. It's the same game, and it
can be entertaining.''


But in too many rinks and for too many nights, today's NHL
brings together clubs that care more about how to avoid losing
rather than creating ways to win.


``If you don't entertain the fans,'' said Hull, hitting upon the
most salient issue, ``then the fans will stop coming. And if you
don't entertain, they won't watch TV. It's this philosophy of being
afraid _ well, I don't know if I'd say afraid _ but there's got to
be some reason for it.''


Reaching back to the era of his father, Bobby Hull, Brett would
give back the curved blades to the shooters. In his view, there was
nothing wrong with the banana blades we saw in the '60s and '70s.


``Heck, the goalies have so much equipment,'' he said, ``you
couldn't hurt 'em with a cannon.''


A marketing coup


Michael Jordan the No. 1 athlete of the century? I realized, oh,
10 years ago that marketing is the message. It took me until last
week to realize that it's the only message . . . The Rangers' Petr
Nedved (still rumored to be on the trade block) recently considered
renting an Upper East Side apartment in a building where magician
David Copperfield resides. The owners eventually pulled the flat
from the market, but Nedved had qualms about taking it anyway. Said
the sleight-of-hand forward: ``I wouldn't want him to make me
disappear.'' . . . Gee, if only the NZT (neutral zone trap) hadn't
been Y2K compliant . . . Buffalo's flashy rookie, Maxim Afinogenov,
has a 12-year-old sister, Katia, who is on course to be the next
sensation in the tennis world. Katia has trained for three years at
Rick Macci's Tennis Academy in Delray Beach, Fla., (stomping
grounds of Jennifer Capriati and the Williams sisters, Venus and
Serena). Macci to the Buffalo News: ``She's one in a million. She's
going to be the Moscow Magician.'' She may be the former, but she
won't be the latter until Bud Collins says so . . . If the Bruins
have to go three months with Jason Allison in mothballs, then I'd
say it's time to pencil them in for a Top 10 pick in the June 10
draft. That's the good news. You already know the bad news . . .
How much longer before the Jerry Springer Show features distraught
parents who live in a hell created by their childrens' overexposure
to sports talk radio? . . . New trio in Manhattan has Theo Fleury
lined up with rookie Mike York (ex- of Michigan State) and Adam
Graves. York was a Michigan State freshman in '95-96, which was
Anson Carter's senior season . . . Pat Verbeek has turned into a
decent pickup for the Red Wings. As of late last week, the
ex-Whaler, who has a Cup ring from his Dallas days, had 8 goals and
18 points in 23 games and was an impressive plus-21, riding on the
No. 1 line with Brendan Shanahan and Steve Yzerman . . . Keep this
in mind, hockey parents, while you're draining that next cup of
gourmet coffee from a filthy arena vending machine: Walter Gretzky
was adamant about not allowing his son, Wayne, to play hockey
year-round. The ice was off-limits for a good portion of the year
at the Great One's house. If you find yourself sipping that same
cup of coffee in July, then it may be time to drop the cup, look in
the mirror, and come out of the rink with your arms up . . . Former
Bruin Gord Kluzak, who splits his time between Goldman Sachs and
the Bruins broadcast booth, isn't so sure that there are more
concussions in today's NHL. It could be, he believes, that there is
just more attention paid to knocks on the head. ``I can remember
being knocked out _ and I mean knocked cold _ when Kraig Nienhuis
and I collided one day in practice. Next day, we had a game, I was
in there. I'm sure I had some of the lingering symptoms _
definitely nausea. But a bad stomach didn't keep you out of the
lineup. Your arm had to be hanging off before something like that
happened.'' . . . Kirk Muller, recently signed in Dallas, spent
months with a personal trainer in the offseason, and he was running
a mile in less than 5 1/2 minutes. ``I'm not going to blow this
chance,'' he said, prior to inking his new deal . . . Goaded on by
general manager Glen Sather, Oiler tough guy Georges Laraque
squared off in a boxing match with Daryl Duke, the club's fitness
guru, who also happens to be a former world champion kick boxer.
With Ping-Pong table pushed aside in the Oiler dressing room, the
wee Duke (165 pounds) and the 230-pound Laraque got into a tussle
that ended with the Oiler winger out with a scratched cornea . . .
If the IIHF buys it and it wins political support across Canada,
former Sabres coach Ted Nolan, under the auspices of the Canadian
Hockey Association, will coach a Native North American hockey club
formed to compete internationally, including in the World
Championships and the Olympics. The 41-year-old Nolan hasn't worked
in the NHL since departing Buffalo in the summer of '97, only weeks
after he was named the NHL's coach of the year and then turned down
a lukewarm offer to remain behind the Buffalo bench. Nolan recently
told the Toronto Globe and Mail: ``I'm going to put an ad in the
Yellow Pages: Coach for hire. Maybe it will work.'' . . . The
Golden State Warriors last week bounced their coach, P.J.
Carlesimo, who was only halfway through his five-year, $15 million
deal. Top NHL coaches make only $1 million a year, and there are a
handful in the $300,000-$500,000 range. All in all, with their
players banking an average $1.3 million per man, NHL head coaches
remain vastly underpaid compared to coaches in the three other
major sports.


Catching a break


The league is investigating the rash of hand injuries
goaltenders have suffered this season. Most of the focus is on the
catching glove, which the league downsized (two inches off the
circumference) in recent moves aimed at giving netminders less of
an advantage . . . No doubt Eric Lindros will have his name on the
Stanley Cup someday. But from here, he looks like hockey's answer
to Roger Clemens. To wit: He'll be in his early- or mid-30s, and
probably with his second or third NHL club, when he finally gets
his hands on the big prize . . . The Hockey News' final edition of
1999 named Bruins owner Jeremy Jacobs as the game's most powerful
team owner and fourth overall on its power-and-influence depth
chart. The top three: commissioner Gary Bettman, union boss Bob
Goodenow, and Wayne Gretzky. Boston GM/president Harry Sinden
ranked No. 14 . . . Monday night, when the Bruins again were
listless in a 3-0 loss on Long Island, three of their alums were
busy banging in pucks for other NHL clubs. Cam Stewart potted a
pair (his fourth and fifth) for the Panthers in a 6-1 victory over
Tampa Bay; Sergei Zholtok knocked in two (9, 10) for the Canadiens
in their 4-4 tie with the Senators, who got help from Shawn
McEachern (No. 11) . . . Monday's drop-dead date came and went
without Keith Primeau taking the Hurricanes' offer of two years at
$3 million per, and management now says it is done with him for the
year. As the witching hour expired, 'Canes GM Jim Rutherford made a
deal, flipping Primeau to Phoenix for Keith Tkachuk. But 'Canes
owner Peter Karmanos put the kibosh on the deal at the 11th hour,
the third time he has vetoed a Primeau deal executed by Rutherford.
In prior deals Primeau would have ended up either a Ranger or a
Flyer . . . Former Maine pivot Bob Corkum, without a contract since
departing Phoenix after last season, finally agreed to a two-year
pact in Anaheim that will bring him a pro-rated $700,000 this
season and $800,000 in 2000-01. The Rangers had a keen interest in
signing Corkum before inking ex-Bruin Tim Taylor, but word around
Manhattan was that he didn't like the Rangers' offer (believed to
be close to the $1.4 million a year Taylor got). In the meantime,
the market corrected dramatically and Corkum, now 32, finally took
what he could get. He would have been a nice fit in the Boston
lineup, especially with the club's lingering faceoff woes . . . You
love the feel of frostbite between your toes if you can't wait for
the next score to pop up on-line from the World Junior tournament
in Skelleftea, Sweden. Two names to file away on your rinkodex,
however: Jason Spezza and Jay Bouwmeester, both are suiting up for
Canada's junior squad. They're both 16 years old, following in the
footsteps of Lindros ('91) and Gretzky ('78) as the only sweet-16
juniors to pull on the Team Maple Leaf sweater. Spezza, a winger,
won't be drafted until 2001 and Bouwmeester isn't eligible until
2002 . . . Jagr, from the main office of the brutally honest: ``I
cannot play defense. I cannot fight, but I have some talent to
score goals.'' A coach caring about Jagr's defense would be like a
math teacher wondering why Bill Gates didn't come to class with one
of those plastic pencil holders tucked into his shirt pocket . . .
Note to boss: just over a week to go before the Let's Play Hockey
International Expo begins its three-day run (Jan. 10-12) in Las
Vegas, bringing together game-related manufacturers. Sounds like
the ideal time to blow the lid off the dirty secrets of the dead
puck era . . . Ray Bourque, on track Saturday to become only the
fifth NHLer to play in four decades, should be joined in that elite
club this afternoon by Mark Messier when the Canucks play in
Calgary. The others: George Armstrong ('49-'71), Gordie Howe
('46-'80), Carl Brewer ('57-'80), and Bobby Hull ('57-'80) . . .
Derek Sanderson had pretty good legs and a sharp mind for the game.
But if the Turk had Geoff Sanderson's legs and steaming slapper, he
might have left the game with 500 goals (vs. 202) . . . The Czech
Republic national junior team went to Sweden without one of its top
wingers, Michal Travnicek (3-2_5 in last year's junior tournament).
A Maple Leaf draft pick, Travnicek is serving a three-year
suspension from international hockey for sticking Sweden's Mattias
Weinhandl in the eye during a junior tournament last November.
Weinhandl, a '99 Islander draft pick, lost 90 percent of the vision
in his left eye and will need surgery . . . Maybe it's just the
season, but in a sentimental swoon last week I found myself missing
the Whale, and even the 1:30 a.m. drives back up I-84, with window
down and blasts of chilled air keeping me from falling asleep at
the wheel . . . Where have you gone, Risto Siltanen?

