
But Gans is not alone in his worry that the news media often
make things look worse than they are, either covering things
cynically or not at all.


For four decades, after all, the political observers with the
biggest audiences _ first Johnny Carson and then Jay Leno and David
Letterman _ have offered uninterrupted cynical criticism of every
president and every member of Congress anyone ever heard of, from
Lyndon Johnson to Edward M. Kennedy to Newt Gingrich.


Joel Silbey, professor of history at Cornell, said the
combination of news and talk had created ``a culture of criticism''
that portrayed government as a continual failure.


Even the revered Walter Cronkite, Silbey said, played a role.
When Cronkite signed off news broadcasts by saying, for example,
``And that's the way it is, Friday, March 28, 1980 _ the 146th day
of captivity for the Americans in Iran,'' Silbey said the anchorman
was saying that on that day, again, the American government was
powerless.


Jon Margolis, a retired Chicago Tribune political columnist,
said he thought the problem became severe in the mid-1980s, when
politics began to be covered by ``younger people who didn't like
politicians and did not like politics'' and were disappointed that
it was not entertaining.


The news media are often attacked, especially by academics, for
paying too much attention to who is ahead and too little to issues.
Nelson Polsby, professor of government at the University of
California at Berkeley, goes a step further. Polsby says the press
and television engage in ``the manufacture of a horse race.'' He
calls the news media just another interest group, ``attempting to
make their product interesting.''


That kind of attention, he said, exaggerated the challenges to
Bob Dole in 1996 by implying that Steve Forbes and Pat Buchanan
should be taken seriously as potential presidents ``and basically
made Bob Dole spend all his money,'' weakening him for the race
against President Clinton.


There are some modest hopes. Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, the
lieutenant governor of Maryland, said that from observing the way
her own children used the Internet and the way it was used in Jesse
Ventura's Reform Party victory in Minnesota, she believed it would
increase political involvement.


``It's immediate,'' she said. ``It's not just television talking
at you, but you participate.''


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


At another level, Mrs. Dwight said that in her part of New
Hampshire, people were actively involved in the problems that
mattered most to them, working hard as volunteers for their
churches and schools.


Silbey said that in Ithaca many of the people most active in
urging policies on local government were nonvoters, preferring to
influence through confrontation.


Gans dismisses those impressions as idiosyncratic, insisting
that national polling data shows that ``if people don't vote, they
tend not to participate in any other societal activity.''


``By and large,'' he said, ``they are disengaged from society.''


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


Not everybody interviewed _ a group whose common threads are
knowledge of politics and little or no direct involvement in the
2000 elections _ was that bothered by nonvoting. Richard Norton
Smith, a biographer and former Republican speechwriter who heads
the Gerald R. Ford Library, said, ``I don't think you condemn the
system if people don't choose to involve themselves in it.''


If the nation truly has only a 12-second attention span, he
said, that may be the fault not of the candidates or consultants,
but of whoever invented the television remote control _ and of the
people themselves.


It is the American people, he said, ``who tell pollsters they
are offended by negative ads,'' and then elect the candidate who
uses them.


``We have no one to blame but ourselves,'' he said. ``In the
end, democracy is all about standing in front of the mirror.''

