
With flashing strobe lights, hovering helicopters,
and a typically atomized approach, Los Angeles said goodbye to the
1900s Saturday morning in a celebration that fell short of its own
aims, dampened by rain and by Southern California's seeming
inability to get too excited about anything.


As darkness fell, the designated municipal icon, the HOLLYWOOD
sign, glowed a midnight blue in the hills above the sprawling
metropolis, and as midnight neared, its letters flashed
periodically in streaks of blue and white, like so much psychedelic
marbleized fudge. Moments before the stroke of midnight, Mayor
Richard Riordan and Jay Leno flipped a switch that sent the sign
flashing into shifting shades of purple, yellow, red and orange,
with white flashing strobes outlining its edges.


But even local television stations seemed to give as much
attention to the sloshing fountains of Las Vegas, apparently
underwhelmed by their own city's stab at civic iconography. And
revelers gathered on the rooftops of the 70-year-old residential
subdivision that the Hollywood sign was built to advertise, kept
waiting for a promised spectacle that never quite materialized.


In sum, the celebration seemed proof positive that Los Angeles
lacks the sort of public gathering place that defines a New York or
London, and the sign-lighting itself remained a largely private
affair, since homeowners in the neighborhoods around it had
protested the plan and the police set up a network of multiple
checkpoints to keep all but residents and their invited guests from
driving into the network of canyons with the best views. Horns and
cheers rang out from a few dozen houses, but there was nothing like
the huge gathering in Times Square.


Though city officials fielded what they called the largest
police operation in Los Angeles history, there were no reports of
serious trouble, and Southern California Edison, which supplies
power to 11 million people in 10 counties, said that there was a
greater risk of electricity problems caused by drunken drivers
hitting utility poles than by any problems in computer programs
governing the power grids.


The festivities got under way Friday afternoon with a musical
celebration dubbed Opus 21, in which churches, choirs and other
groups began a simultaneous sounding of bells, cymbals, gongs and
shofars to start the celebration. But by mid-afternoon, pouring
rain and spotty street flooding had scattered a crowd of several
hundred people from Grand Avenue downtown, where the theme was
``The Global Village,'' with a sort of street fair featuring
face-painters, a Ferris wheel and considerably fewer than the 2,000
marching band members that had been promised.


``So far, so good,'' said Linda Miller, who came from nearby
Torrance, Calif., where her husband, Dave, to watch their daughter
march in the band.


``I kind of wish it didn't have to rain.'' Surveying the crowd,
she added: ``It's a little thin. I think they were a little light
on the advertising.''


A few blocks away, on Olvera Street, the site of the city's
original Spanish settlement, crowds were thicker.


But by night's end, police officers in the city's official
command center were downing deli sandwiches and complaining of an
unexpected challenge: boredom.

