
The state of the race is far less settled than on the eve of the
primaries four years ago, when President Clinton faced no
opposition and Bob Dole towered over the field. Dole was bruised
and battered more than he expected, but still managed to crush his
rivals.


Despite the emergence of McCain, the most striking aspect of the
2000 campaign has been Bush's success. Though he was twice elected
governor of Texas, Bush had no national political seasoning and
popped up virtually out of nowhere to amass a staggering,
record-breaking war chest of over $67 million. He captured the
early support of far more Republican members of Congress, governors
and conservative leaders than Dole did at this point in the 1996
race.


And his political might forced half the Republican field out of
the race, including former Vice President Dan Quayle, Elizabeth
Dole, Rep. John Kasich of Ohio and former Gov. Lamar Alexander of
Tennessee. The only ones left standing are McCain; Forbes; Sen.
Orrin Hatch of Utah; Alan Keyes, a former State Department
official; and Gary Bauer, the former head of the Family Research
Council.


The outpouring for the Texas governor has offended some
Republicans who think it appears that he is being crowned. Craig
Grimes, a foreman for a power company in Youngstown, Ohio, who
responded to a New York Times/CBS News Poll, said he was taken
aback by how Rush Limbaugh and Republican luminaries defend Bush.


``It's like a football game, and they're all running ahead and
clearing the way, running interference and blocking for Bush,''
said Grimes. ``They've poured the money into him. And it scares me
because he's going to owe big time whoever it is who is pushing
him.''


The challenge, now, for Bush is to meet the high expectations he
helped create for himself by actually winning some elections. He
also needs to overcome an image from debates in December that he is
not as versed in the issues or as nimble on his feet as some
Republicans had hoped.


And while Republicans enjoy a tradition of nominating their
front-runner, Bush has less national campaign experience than any
Republican nominee since Dwight D. Eisenhower, who was elected
president in 1952.


Gore had a far rockier year than Bush. That was especially
apparent because he was confronted only by one rival and had
expected to glide to the nomination unimpeded. Instead, Bradley
showed such political potency last year that he forced the vice
president to practically reinvent his campaign and shed many
trappings of incumbency.


``Had Gore not altered the terrain in September, he'd be gone by
now,'' said Sen. Joseph Biden, D-Del. who has not endorsed either
candidate. ``He was on such a slide through the summer. But he's
righted the ship.''


The two Democrats seem to agree on the leading issues _ health
care, education, Social Security and campaign finance reform _ but
they have argued vehemently over the details. The Republicans, by
contrast, have been wrangling over a different set of issues,
namely tax cuts, foreign policy and social issues like abortion.


Yet perhaps because no single burning issue seems to have
grabbed the electorate, the candidates are devoting much time to
talking about themselves as human beings, from their upbringings to
their decisions to enter politics. They are also trying, perhaps,
to set themselves on a higher moral plane than Clinton.


``I can't name issues that excite the public, so we have to
create issues, like health care,'' said Gerald Gamm, chairman of
the political science department at the University of Rochester.
``When the economy is in the midst of its most robust economic
expansion in most of our lifetimes, when the nation, economically,
is on top of the world, voters aren't paying attention to issues.
So what is new now is that candidates are being aggressive in
marketing their private lives.''


But the biggest concern of the party chairmen is not the choice
of issues, but the amount of time candidates will have to discuss
them.


``This is a crazy way to determine the nominees of the parties,
because there's really no time for almost anyone to have a cogent
debate,'' said Rendell, the Democratic chairman. ``It just lends
itself to those god-awful 30-second ads.''

