
Ben Wallace's hairstyle has become one of the big
sports stories in Orlando.


Wallace likes corn rows because they are nice and neat, but a
poll of Magic fans show that 62 percent want him to keep the retro
big Afro he has worn lately. Here's why:


The Magic won seven of nine games after Wallace let his hair
free in early December. That they dropped two games last week by a
combined five points might indicate that the charm has gone.


But does Wallace have the courage to change and perhaps ``doom''
his team to mediocrity? Orlando was 8-9 in corn-row games.


Wallace wore the Afro in his finest game of the season, leading
the Magic to victory over Charlotte with 14 points, 15 rebounds and
six blocked shots.


``He's like Sampson _ the longer the hair, the more power he
has,'' coach Doc Rivers said. ``Now, we've just got to keep Delilah
away from him.''


``They're chanting for the 'fro, but they aren't the ones who
have to keep it combed. It's a lot of work when it's long,''
Wallace said. ``I'll probably just have it rolled back up (in corn
rows).''


Not so darling kings


They may be the darlings of the NBA, but the Sacramento Kings
appear far away from taking the step that would make them true
contenders in the league.


Including Wednesday's victory over Seattle, the Kings are 8-10
since they started the season 9-2 and appeared to justify the faith
that Turner sports showed by scheduling them for TNT and TBS more
than any other team in the league.


Some of the symptoms: Nick Anderson is back to where he was the
year before last in Orlando, hanging out on the 3-point line,
shooting 35 percent from the floor and fearing any trip to the foul
line, where he has severe problems. Jason Williams is shooting 36
percent, 28 percent on threes, which he often takes from a step or
two behind the line.


Chris Webber says, ``We're nothing special. Darlings of the NBA,
Cinderellas, all that is thrown out the window, 'cause, if we're
all of that and we don't win, that means nothing. We'll be a bunch
of cute little kids, cute guys for the next five or six years and
it doesn't matter. We need to win.''


The hard part, coach Rick Adelman, said, is that ``people talk
about that (NBA darling label), and I think for us to become a
better team and to be a good team, we have to defend better, and
we've got to rebound the ball better. And, really, a lot of times,
our decision-making _ if things are going good, you can be
creative, do a lot of things. When things aren't, you've got to be
a little bit more disciplined. We're struggling with that a little
bit right now, but I think it's going to come. This team's only
been together, the main guys, for 70 games. It's a very young team.
. . . With experience, they're going to get much better.''


THUMBS UP


Utah's retiring president Frank Layden, who got out while he
still had his health and his sense of humor. Thanks for all the fun
he provided for everyone around the NBA for nearly a quarter
century after starting as a Hawks assistant coach under Hubie
Brown.


THUMBS DOWN


Knicks tough guy Kurt Thomas grabbed Eddie Jones' left arm so
hard to stop a layup that Jones suffered a torn ligament in his
elbow, putting him out six week. Six days later, Thomas threw a
combination of punches at Jalen Rose of Indiana and was hit with a
two-game suspension, plus $10,000 in fines.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

