
At halftime of Boston College's debacle.com against the
University of Colorado Friday in the Insight.com Bowl, coach Tom
O'Brien told his players to forget about the score. Though the
Eagles trailed, 45-7, O'Brien admonished them not to look at the
scoreboard, not to look at the clock, and to keep playing football
in the second half.


That explained why, as he jogged off the field at Arizona
Stadium at game's end and made his way to BC's locker room, O'Brien
looked up and took one last peek at the scoreboard. It glared back
at him with the final score:


Colorado 62, BC 28.


``I told them we were just going to play and see what (the
score) was at the end of the game, so I was just checking it out,''
O'Brien admitted. ``I had looked up before, but consciously I made
the effort to look because I had no idea what the score was at the
end.''


And as much as he wanted to turn back the clock on New Year's
Eve and erase the 62 points and 523 yards of total offense Colorado
rolled up, O'Brien knew his team's first bowl appearance in five
years _ as flawed as it was _ in no way tarnished the overall
achievement of an 8-4 season. While he tried to get his players to
forget the score at halftime, he wanted them to remember what it
felt like, hoping to use it as a springboard for the underclassmen
who will return next season.


``I want it to carry over, I do,'' O'Brien said. ``I want it to
carry over for the young kids who played in this football game. I
want them to understand that this is the level we've got to get to
(in order) to play here. We have to be a much better football team
than we were today.


``My only regret was that we didn't do a better job in these
last two games for these seniors who played so hard and had done so
well this year,'' added O'Brien of the 13 departing seniors,
including six on defense led by All-America tackle Chris Hovan.
``But we're still 8-4 and there aren't a ton of eight-win teams out
there. I don't know how many Boston College teams have beaten
Syracuse, West Virginia, and Notre Dame three games in a row. So we
still have got a lot of proud (accomplishments).''


Prior to the season, when BC was picked by the media to finish
fifth in the Big East, O'Brien said he thought the Eagles were
capable of going 6-5. Emboldened by the indefatigable spirit and
hard work of a senior class that had lived through the gambling
scandal of 1996, the Eagles exceeded O'Brien's expectations by
reeling off victories over the Orangemen (24-23), Mountaineers
(34-17), and Fighting Irish (31-29) for their sixth, seventh, and
eighth triumphs of the year.


It was, as O'Brien suggested, the first time a BC team had
recorded consecutive victories over those three opponents. In 1993
and 1994, BC beat Syracuse and Notre Dame only to be thwarted by
West Virginia. Next season, the Eagles will be hard pressed to
duplicate the feat.


While the offense will return most of its key players, with the
notable exception of center Butch Palaza, right tackle Darnell
Alford, tight end Bryan Arndt, wideout Derrick Crittenden, and
running back Carlton Rowe, BC's defense will need to be
reconstructed after the losses of linemen Hovan, Mike Willetts, and
Adam Newman, linebacker Frank Chamberlin, and safeties Pedro Cirino
and George White.


``I can't say enough about the seniors on this football team and
what they've meant to this program and what they've been through,''
O'Brien said. ``It was probably one last time to impress upon the
young kids and point to the fact that guys like Willetts and
Crittenden and Chamberlin, they don't miss practice. They're out
there every day. They're tough, hard-nosed people, which is what we
need to have in this program. I just can't wait to start spring
practice.''


With so many losses on defense, quarterback Tim Hasselbeck _
who, like several of his teammates, played against Colorado feeling
under the weather with a 102-degree temperature _ knows BC's
offense will have to carry the team next season.


``Yeah, because we lose some great players on defense,'' said
Hasselbeck, who will be surrounded by several promising returnees,
including running backs Cedric Washington and William Green,
receivers Dedrick Dewalt and Jamal Burke, tight end Robert Ellis,
and linemen Paul LaQuerre, Paul Zukauskas, and Michael Cook. ``We
know you're not going to replace those guys in one year. But it's
just like anything, people need to step up and make plays for us
like Cedric did when Mike Cloud left. That's what we need to count
on, and hopefully we can get it done.''


Defensively, almost all of the departing seniors seemed to agree
that _ despite so many losses in the front seven _ the Eagles would
be in good hands with the return of linebackers Scott Bradley and
Jerome Ledbetter, tackle Antonio Garay, and cornerbacks Jonathan
Ordway and RaMon Johnson. Doug Bessette and Ralph Parent, who
combined for BC's final touchdown as Bessette returned a Parent
blocked punt 9 yards, will likely step in as replacements for White
and Cirino at strong and free safety, respectively.


On special teams, the Eagles lose four-year starting kicker John
Matich, but return Sandro Sciortino, who redshirted this season.
Punter Kevin McMyler, who emerged at the end of the season, is also
expected back along with return men Green, Dewalt, and DuJuan
Daniels.


``They're a good football team,'' O'Brien said of the Eagles.
``And, as I said to the team afterward, `If you want to be a great
football team, you have to get to this point.' Not that they're a
great football team now, but they might be in another year or so.
They're disappointed now, but when it all settles we've still got a
lot to be proud of, especially these seniors. The bar is set at
seven, and we'll see what the 2000 football team can do.''

