
It was only on the fourth day of captivity that the Indian
government began negotiating with the hijackers _ and many of the
passengers felt abandoned. If there had been a minister or VIP on
board, they told one another, they would already be free.


``We were not getting any information from the Indian
government,'' said Mrs. Menon. ``And the hijackers were being very
friendly to us, very genuine. We didn't know they had killed
Rupal.''


On Wednesday, the sixth day, the hijackers told the hostages
that 35 of them would be exchanged for one militant. Women,
children and the elderly were selected for the swap. One elderly
woman refused to leave her grandchildren.


Many of those left behind sobbed, fearing they would be more
vulnerable now that many of the weaker people were gone.


But the next morning brought what all the hostages said was the
most terrifying moment. Something had gone badly wrong in the
negotiations. The deal had apparently fallen through. And Burger
was furious.


People were still asleep, but he wanted to wake them. First he
threw open the doors of the jet and the cold wind swept down the
aisles. Then he turned on the lights. Finally he got on the
intercom.


He told them all to pray to their Gods because in half an hour
he and his fellow hijackers would begin shooting them. And if
anyone so much as moved, he warned, he or she would be killed. He
ordered them all to put their heads down.


For hours Mrs. Menon, a dentist, said there was pin-drop silence
except for the sound of people weeping. She held onto her husband's
hand for comfort. ``At that time, we came to know these people were
not to be trusted,'' she said. ``We thought the end had come.''


Kollatt, a father of three who was traveling alone, found
himself wondering who would be picked first. ``I started weighing
every person. Is it you or you? Will they ask for volunteers? Will
I volunteer?''


But that same afternoon, the hostages say, the hijackers came to
tell them that they had made a new deal to free all of them. And
the next day, New Year's Eve, when the moment of liberation finally
arrived, it was the hijackers who left the plane first.


Before climbing down the ladder, Burger turned to the hostages
and apologized for what they had done. ``We'll meet again,'' he
said, waving.


In his final moments with his captives, several of them joked
with him. ``If you see us in an airport lounge and you are on a
similar mission, will you tip us off so we can stay off the
flight?'' one asked.


He promised he would. And then he was gone, down a ladder to a
waiting car that whisked him away on a vanishing mission.

