
Don't call Jim and Susan Smith survivalists.


In fact, you don't even have to call them Jim and Susan _ those
aren't their real names.


Thing is, they don't want their real names used. They have a
good thing _ a secure thing _ going, and they'd just as soon not
publicize it.


They're not digging bomb shelters and running around in
camouflage. The whole idea of locked-and-loaded Uzis and concertina
wire festooned around the perimeter and hundreds of cases of pork
and beans in the bunker gives them the creeps.


But they do intend to survive, should things get ugly in the
aftermath of Y2K. Call them, perhaps, Survivalists Lite.


They'd prefer another term: subsistence farmers. After all, they
live in a wholly self-sufficient manner on a remote west Marin
County ridgetop, not far from San Francisco.


The steep, narrow road to their 60-acre farm is protected by a
locked gate. They grow all their own food, and their water is piped
from a spring and two wells. They heat with wood harvested from
trees grown on their property.


They've also just completed a photovoltaic and wind system that
will keep their farm supplied with electricity, even if the
national power grid collapses.


``We got it finished just in time, and it works beautifully,''
said Susan Friday afternoon. ``We're having a glass of champagne
with our solar engineer to celebrate.''


And even if the oil refineries shut down, they'll still be able
to farm their three acres of hillside cropland. They keep two big
draft horses on their spread, and they own a variety of horse-drawn
plows and cultivators.


The Smiths farm for both the home larder and the market _ and it
isn't easy. When they bought their hillside holding 20 years ago,
the soil was thin and poor. They have spent the intervening years
assiduously building it up with compost and ``green manures'' _
plowed-under legumes and grasses.


``It's taken a lot of work,'' sighed Susan as she watched her
husband turn over ground for a raspberry patch with a walking
tractor, a kind of ultrapowerful diesel rototiller. ``And it's
still a lot of work.''


The Smiths also raise sheep, chickens and turkeys. All their
produce is grown organically. For the marketplace, they concentrate
on garlic and raspberries, crops that provide a fairly high yield
and generally decent price for their labor. Their vegetables come
from a large garden that's still providing some tomatoes.


``That's unusual even for this part of Marin,'' she said. ``The
temperatures are generally higher up on the ridgetops than in the
valleys during the winter, but things are even warmer than usual
this year. From a farmer's point of view, it's kind of scary. If
our raspberries don't go dormant, they won't produce any fruit next
year.''


The Smiths take Y2K seriously and haven't been at all assured by
government and corporate assurances that everything's going to be
hunky-dory, a few minor glitches notwithstanding.


``I don't think people realize the food security in this country
is nil,'' said Susan. ``If Y2K doesn't cause shortages, I'm still
convinced we'll see them within 10 years. We've given over our food
supply to the industrial model, and we've lost our control, our
health and our connection to the land as a result.''


The Smiths planned to spend New Year's Eve entertaining some
friends with drinks and a homegrown dinner.


``We'll have between 12 and 20 people here, depending on who
floats through,'' said Susan.


From their ridgetop perspective, it seemed unlikely that the new
millennium will shape up much differently than the old one. As
midnight approached, the wind still soughed through the trees, and
the owls still hooted.


There was no talk of manning the ramparts in preparation for the
coming chaos. Armed defense wasn't in the game plan. They don't own
an arsenal.


``A couple of shotguns, and that's about it,'' observed Jim.


That's hardly enough to deter ravening hordes from the city. But
they think _ hope, at least _ their isolation and self-sufficiency
will give them all the protection they need.


While the Smiths felt ready for Y2K, they're not at all sure
about the rest of us. Particularly those of us who work with big,
potentially dangerous chunks of industrial infrastructure.


``Most of the 460 nuclear reactors in the world aren't Y2K
compliant,'' Susan said, ``and simply taking them offline may not
be enough. A plant still needs power to keep coolant over the core
to prevent radiation release. We really don't know the state of
their backup generator systems.''


The Smiths have focused most of their Y2K preparations on their
farm, but that isn't necessarily how they would have preferred it.


Susan served on a community committee that was convened to
devise local strategies for dealing with Y2K. She was disheartened
by the experience.


``Basically, no one showed up at the meetings,'' she said. ``We
tried to get funding to store grain at the local fire station, but
that didn't come through. And then we tried to plant a field to
grain, but the tractor we were able to get didn't work with the
seed drill we had. There just wasn't enough community interest to
get anything done.''


Despite their concerns, the Smiths approached Y2K with more
festivity than foreboding.


Their preparations for the final countdown were upbeat, though
with a decidedly rural twist some urbanites might have found a
little too real for comfort _ such as slaughtering the turkey that
was a star feature of the repast.


After quickly decapitating the bird, Susan scalded and plucked
the carcass with the help of a couple of friends.


``We're going to smoke him in a pit,'' she said as she expertly
pulled some pinfeathers from the plump breast. ``He'll be
delicious. People who have never eaten a turkey that grew up
running around, eating greens and insects, don't really know how
good they taste.''

