
When he ended his streak without a goal in 12 games
just over two weeks ago, Patrik Elias of the Devils said that the
goals would start to come more frequently. They have indeed come at
a rate that even Elias failed to predict.


The Boston Bruins have been Elias' biggest victim. After scoring
the game-winner in overtime against the Bruins in New Jersey on
Wednesday night, Elias scored again Saturday night in a 2-2 tie
with the Bruins at the Fleet Center.


Elias' goal put the Devils in the lead, but Jason Allison's
second goal of the night tied the game for the Bruins, who have
only two victories in their last 16 games (2-9-5). This was a
National Hockey League-high 13th overtime game for the Bruins, who
are 13-16-10-2 over all.


Elias' goal was his eighth in the last 10 games after scoring
just twice in his first 18 games. After missing all of training
camp and the first nine games of the season as an unsigned
restricted free agent, Elias has combined with Jason Arnott and
Petr Sykora to bring the line back to where it was last season as
the Devils' most productive combination.


``I was getting a lot of chances and it was a matter of time
before they started going into the net,'' Elias said. ``Our line is
working really well right now.''


Elias' play has helped the Devils (21-12-5-2) to their seventh
victory in the last 10 games (7-2-1).


His goal came on a marvelous individual effort 10 minutes 3
seconds into the second period, and it gave the Devils a 2-1 lead.
He muscled his way through the left side behind Kyle McLaren of the
Bruins and found goalie Byron Dafoe's far corner with a backhand.


``That wasn't just nice, it was unbelievable,'' Bobby Holik said
of the goal by Elias. ``It was another highlight goal.''


The way things have been going for the Bruins lately was
demonstrated just 22 seconds into the game. The Devils scored at
that point, the first time they entered Boston's zone, when Scott
Niedermayer stepped in front of Dafoe and deflected Holik's shot
from the left side for his fourth goal of the season.


Niedermayer's goal discouraged the Bruins to such a degree that
they did not take their first shot at Martin Brodeur until the 8:06
mark of the first period. Once they took that first shot, however,
the Bruins took control of the game for the rest of the period.


Boston's domination was translated into Allison's eighth goal of
the season with 4:15 left in the third period. It was the first
game for Allison after missing three with a wrist injury. He got
his goal when he deflected McLaren's shot to the left of the
screened Brodeur.

