
When Boris Yeltsin unveiled his millennium surprise on New
Year's Eve, he used the word ``power'' five times in his brief
retirement speech.


When Lenin issued his famous call to revolution on Oct. 24,
1917, he also used the word ``power'' five times. Lenin was getting
ready to seize it. Yeltsin, who will go down in history as the man
who toppled the totalitarian system Lenin wrought, said he was
relinquishing it.


Yet power, and the thirst for it, is the connection between two
Russian leaders who only a few years ago symbolized opposite
extremes.


As was clear from the moment he mentioned his anointed
successor, Vladimir Putin (``I have no doubt what choice you will
make at the end of March 2000'' ), Yeltsin left office not to
protect the fragile democracy that brought about his election in
1992 but to preserve the power that his administration came to
revere above all else.


As political theater, it was a classic Yeltsin move _
unpredictable but shrewd. Yeltsin no doubt realized that Putin's
surge in popularity, based on public support for a military
crackdown in Chechnya, might not last until June, when elections
were supposed to take place. By then, enough soldiers will have
come home in body bags to contradict the promise of a clean, easy
victory _ as they did the last time Yeltsin tried to impose Russian
might on the rebel republic.


``Why hold on to power for another six months?'' Yeltsin said,
with a straight face. ``No, this is not me, this is not in my
character.''


Holding on to power, against all odds, has been the one steady
feature of Yeltsin's remarkably inconsistent tenure as president.
And that too is not all that surprising. Power has been the driving
force of Russian politics since the time of the czars, through the
Soviet Union and beyond. For all the mistakes and misjudgments that
Yeltsin conceded and regretted, he never lost sight of what matters
in Russia. Russians have been so broken for so long that they have
learned to respond only to an iron fist, and Yeltsin played to that
instinct again and again, taking on the role of the autocrat as
nimbly as he had turned himself into a democrat when the Soviet
Empire began to topple.


Over the past few years, the West has mainly seen Yeltsin
through the prism of news clips, embarrassing shots of him toppling
over at official ceremonies, frugging at a rock concert or
recovering from heart surgery in a government dacha. Russians have
also seen him act out rituals that date to the czars, shaking his
finger at quaking local bureaucrats, ordering them to raise wages
that Moscow had already cut back.


He came to public notice in the late 1980s as a populist who
rode public buses and hectored party officials, but he seamlessly
recast himself as an age-old Kremlin ruler, surrounded by
sycophants and bodyguards, allowing corruption to flourish at the
highest levels.


During the coup of 1991, when Yeltsin stood on a tank to defy
the old Soviet guard into history, he created one of the most
electrifying moments in the recent past.


But when he took over, he ruled by contradiction. He fired
scores of advisers, rehired many and fired them again _ and again.


Anatoly Chubais, a former deputy prime minister who is viewed by
the West as the last guarantor of free-market rules, was kicked in
and out of power. So was Boris Berezovsky, the crafty tycoon who
symbolizes the entrenched business interests that want to impose
their own rule on the Russian market. Yeltsin deserves credit for
seeking to introduce real economic freedom in a country that never
experienced it, but he will also be remembered as the ruler who
oversaw the birth of Russia's plutocracy.


He will get credit for leaving the Kremlin voluntarily,
something no one in Russian history had ever done, except Mikhail
Gorbachev _ at a time when Yeltsin had the upper hand and had left
him no choice.


But this was not like a broken Lyndon Johnson refusing to run
for a second term. Yeltsin wants to be succeeded by someone whose
loyalty will last and will not hound him in retirement with
criminal charges, financial restraints or just lese majeste. Putin
remains unproven as a leader. For now, he mainly represents
Yeltsin's desire to keep his grip on Russia's future _ and preserve
his own.


Or, as Lenin put it in 1917, ``the seizure of power is the
business of the uprising; its political purpose will become clear
after the seizure.''

