
As the NFL heads into its last regular-season games on
the first weekend of 2000, beat reporter Mark Schlabach takes a
look back at a surprising 1999 season:


OFFENSIVE MVP


1. Marshall Faulk, RB, Rams. Faulk should break the NFL record
for yards from scrimmage in a season.


2. Peyton Manning, QB, Colts. Manning is the NFL's best
quarterback in only his second season.


3. Edgerrin James, RB, Colts. No wonder Indianapolis drafted him
ahead of Heisman Trophy winner Ricky Williams.


4. Kurt Warner, QB, Rams. Warner should join Miami's Dan Marino
as the only NFL quarterbacks to throw 40 TD passes in a season.


5. Stephen Davis, RB, Redskins. Davis' running set up the deep
pass for Brad Johnson and Michael Westbrook.


DEFENSIVE MVP


1. Warren Sapp, DT, Buccaneers. He might be the most dominant
player in the league.


2. Kevin Carter, DE, Rams. Carter is as important to St. Louis
on defense as Warner and Faulk are on offense.


3. Jevon Kearse, DE, Titans. How could 15 teams have passed up
this physical specimen?


4. Ray Lewis, LB, Ravens. Lewis leads the league in tackles.


5. Robert Porcher, DT, Lions. Porcher broke the team record for
sacks in a season, with 14 1/2.


COACH OF THE YEAR


1. Bill Parcells, Jets. Just when it seemed the Jets would fold,
they stunned the Bills and Cowboys and the Dolphins twice.


2. Jim Mora, Colts. Mora has regained respect after quitting in
New Orleans.


3. Dick Vermeil, Rams. Would Vermeil be here if Trent Green had
not been injured in the preseason?


4. Mike Shanahan, Broncos. Denver was competitive despite losing
John Elway, Terrell Davis and Shannon Sharpe.


5. Gunther Cunningham, Chiefs. The first-year coach has Kansas
City playing hard and with discipline.


ROOKIE OF THE YEAR


1. Edgerrin James, RB, Colts. James earned nearly $15 million in
salary and incentives, which is what many thought Ricky Williams
would do this season.


2. Jevon Kearse, DE, Titans. Kearse, a linebacker at Florida,
twice this season broke the NFL record for sacks by a rookie.


3. Tim Couch, QB, Browns. Couch peformed well despite playing
behind the league's worst offensive line.


4. Champ Bailey, CB, Redskins. The former Georgia star set
rookie record with three picks in one game but seemed to fade late
in the season.


5. Damien Woody, C, Patriots. In a few years, the former Boston
College star will be the NFL's top center.


COMEBACK PLAYER OF THE YEAR


1. Bryant Young, DT, 49ers. Young is back in the Pro Bowl only a
year after a horrific leg injury.


2. Jeff George, QB, Vikings. The former Falcon rescued
Minnesota, his third team in six years.


3. Tyrone Wheatley, RB, Raiders. Traded by the Giants and cut by
the Dolphins in the preseason, he was a star in Oakland.


4. Jeff Blake, QB, Bengals. Benched and injured in 1998, Blake
will get a big contract from someone in the offseason.


5. Alonzo Spellman, DT, Cowboys. The former Bear's comeback off
the field has been even more remarkable.


ROOKIE STEALS


These players were overlooked in the draft but outplayed several
high-profile rookies:


1. Olandis Gary, RB, Broncos. The fourth-rounder should break
Bobby Humphrey's team record for rushing yards by a rookie.


2. Terrence Wilkins, KR/WR, Colts. The undrafted rookie from
Virginia has scored three different ways and should be playing in
the Pro Bowl.


3. Martin ramatica, K, Buccaneers. Gramatica was a
third-rounder, but the former Kansas State star has been
``automatica.''


4. Mike McKenzie, CB, Packers. The last of three defensive backs
drafted by Green Bay, the former Memphis star played the best.


5. Wali Rainer, LB, Browns. The fourth-rounder replaced retired
star Chris Spielman.


COACHES ON THE HOT SEAT


These coaches might get pink slips from their owners:


1. Pete Carroll, Patriots. Carroll's team collapsed in the
second half; his agent already is making telephone calls.


2. Mike Ditka, Saints. Ditka says he's coming back, but others
aren't so convinced that owner Tom Benson won't clean house.


3. Chan Gailey, Cowboys. The decision that Norv Turner will stay
in Washington might give the Americus native one more year in
Dallas.


4. Bill Cowher, Steelers. How desperate is Cowher to leave
Pittsburgh? He confirmed rumors linking him to N.C. State.


5. Ray Rhodes, Packers. Rhodes will have to shake up his staff,
at least, after a disappointing first season in Green Bay.


ON THE RISE


These players are very close to being stars:


1. Donnie Abraham, CB, Buccaneers. Abraham should be starting in
the Pro Bowl instead of Deion Sanders.


2. Barrett Robbins, C, Raiders. Robbins is a big reason why the
Raiders lead the league in rushing offense.


3. Robert Hicks, OT, Bills. In his second season, the former
Douglass High star has outstanding feet and technique.


4. Marcus Robinson, WR, Bears. The Fort Valley native probably
cost Curtis Conway his job.


5. Stephen Alexander, TE, Redskins. The second-year pro can
block and has outstanding hands.


UNSUNG HEROES


These guys are some of the unsung heroes you probably never have
heard of:


1. Norman Hand, DT, Chargers. The former Mississippi star is a
big reason why San Diego is so tough against the run.


2. Patrick Jeffers, WR, Panthers. Jeffers is a big, fast
receiver with good hands -- just what the Falcons could have used.


3. Aaron Beasley, CB, Jaguars. The former West Virginia star
inexplicably was snubbed in voting for the Pro Bowl.


4. Jason Belser, SS, Colts. In his eighth season, Belser put
some bite into the Indianapolis secondary.


5. London Fletcher, LB, Rams. The undrafted rookie from John
Carroll University is one of the league's fastest linebackers.


CRYSTAL BALL


Fearless predictions for the 2000 season:


1. Quarterback Steve Young returns to the 49ers, but receiver
Jerry Rice doesn't, because San Francisco can't fit both players
under the salary cap.


2. Receiver Michael Irvin retires because of a neck injury, and
Cowboys owner Jerry Jones replaces him with the Raiders' Tim Brown,
a native of Dallas.


3. Jets coach Bill Parcells returns for one more season, but
quarterback Vinny Testaverde doesn't win back his job from Ray
Lucas.


4. Patriots coach Pete Carroll is fired by owner Robert Kraft,
who hires Jets assistant head coach Bill Belichick.


5. Dolphins quarterback Dan Marino and coach Jimmy Johnson
return to Miami and live happily ever after -- with running back
Barry Sanders.


TOP FIVE STORIES


he top five news developments of the 1999 season:


1. Walter Payton dies -- The Chicago Bears legend succumbed to
cancer after a long battle with liver disease and, as always,
``Sweetness'' handled it with class.


2. Injuries: Injuries sidelined several of the league's top
players, including Jamal Anderson, Terrell Davis, Steve Young,
Vinny Testaverde and Michael Irvin.


3. Rae Carruth arrested -- Carolina receiver was charged with
murder in the shooting death of his pregnant girlfriend.


4. Houston awarded franchise -- Houston businessman Bob McNair
landed a team for the former home of Oilers; Los Angeles was passed
over again.


5. Barry Sanders retires: Lions running back abruptly retired
before the season, but Detroit made the playoffs anyway.


FALLING FAST


These aging players are past their prime:


1. Charles Haley, DE, 49ers. A big factor in the playoffs last
season, Haley wasn't even on the stat sheets this year.


2. Ben Coates, TE, Patriots. Coates' attitude and mouth probably
have worn out their welcome in New England.


3. Steve Atwater, FS, Jets. The Jets learned what Denver already
knew: Atwater is slow and no longer can cover receivers.


4. Morten Andersen, K, Falcons. Once a weapon late in the game,
Andersen barely is getting chances at 39.


5. Dan Marino, QB, Dolphins. His arm seems to get tired, and his
decisions aren't as sharp, either.


TIRED ACTS


These guys' antics and behavior have gotten very old:


1. Ryan Leaf, QB, Chargers. The former Washington State star
owns this space.


2. Jimmy Johnson, coach, Dolphins. Johnson should quit blaming
Dan Marino and look in the mirror. Johnson's the one who rested his
running game on troubled Cecil Collins' shoulders.


3. Bill Romanowski, LB, Broncos. He will break the NFL records
for illegal hits and fines before he retires.


4. Michael Westbrook, WR, Redskins. Even when he's playing well,
Westbrook can't keep his mouth shut. His charges of nepotism were
outrageous.


5. Joey Galloway, WR, Seahawks. Is it just a coincidence that
the Seahawks collapsed after his return from a contract holdout?


DIRECT DEPOSIT


These players are laughing all the way to the bank after putting
up huge numbers in contract years:


1. Simeon Rice, DE, Cardinals. Arizona already has too much
money invested in its defensive line, so Rice could end up in his
native Chicago in 2000.


2. Corey Dillon, RB, Bengals. Cincinnati offered him
Duce-Staley-like money; Dillon will get a contract more like Jamal
Anderson's.


3. Tony Brackens, DE, Jaguars. Another top pass rusher, but his
history of injuries still is a concern.


4. Chuck Smith, DE, Falcons. The Falcons probably can't afford
him, but Green Bay or Jacksonville probably can.


5. Jeff George, QB, Vikings. Minnesota might have too much money
invested in Randall Cunningham and Daunte Culpepper to re-sign
George.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

