
Five years ago, responding to an increase in serious juvenile
crime, the state of Maryland initiated one of the nation's largest
boot camp programs for teen-age criminals. The program, called the
Leadership Challenge, quickly became the model for other states.
But last week, after reviewing a task force report that documented
instances of physical abuse at their camps, Maryland officials
appeared on the verge of conceding that the current initiative was
a failure.


The Maryland experience, together with problems in other states,
has already led some states to close their boot camps and even to
rethink how their penal laws treat young offenders. All in all, it
is a remarkable turn of events for an idea that was once greeted as
a breakthrough in the fight against juvenile crime


There is increasing evidence that boot-camps never worked. A
national study last year by the Koch Crime Institute, a public
policy group in Topeka, Kan., showed that recidivism among boot
camp attendees ranged from 64 percent to 75 percent, slightly
higher than for youths sentenced to adult prisons.


Gerald Wells, a senior research associate at the Koch Institute,
said of the report, ``The shocking parts are the allegations of
abuse, but the more alarming parts are the failures.''


Research has also shown, according to Wells and other penal
justice experts, that these camps were grounded in a false and
unexamined assumption.


``People thought boot camps shaped up a lot of servicemen during
three wars,'' Wells added. ``But just because you place someone in
a highly structured environment with discipline, does not mean once
they get home, and are out of that, they will be model citizens.''


Boot camps have their roots in the 1970s, with the advent of
large, well-organized and extremely violent street gangs. In
response to these groups, many states began to imprison more young
people.


By the 1990s, as the number of repeat juvenile offenders rose to
record levels, it became clear that prison sentences were not
working. In 1994, nearly 10,000 juveniles were charged with
criminal offenses, an all-time high. More than 2,300 of them were
charged with murder, compared with fewer than 1,000 in 1980,
according to the Justice Department's Office of Juvenile Justice
and Delinquency Prevention. On any given day, about 105,000
children were in custody on criminal charges in the United States.


It was in this atmosphere that Maryland Lt. Gov. Kathleen
Kennedy Townsend began exploring the potential of boot camps.


Shortly after being elected with Gov. Parris Glendening in 1994,
Ms. Townsend, a former deputy assistant attorney general in the
Clinton administration, said she considered boot camps ``a
cost-effective, intermediate punishment'' and included them among
her priorities.


Ms. Townsend has said the idea came from visiting a juvenile
boot camp in Ohio. By then, a handful of states, including Georgia,
Louisiana, West Virginia and Ohio, had begun well-publicized,
promising experiments with juvenile camps.


The camps, modeled after similar programs that popped up in
England in the 1970s, were designed for juveniles who had committed
moderately serious crimes, such as auto theft, with the goal of
interceding before they moved to more serious crimes.


By 1997, more than 27,000 teen-agers were passing through 54
camps in 23 states annually.


The people who ran the real boot camps, were quite skeptical.
``The key reason we are successful is that we have a clientele down
here that chose to be here on their own,'' said Sgt. Maj. Ford
Kinsley, who oversees drill instructors at U.S. Marine Corps'
recruitment base in Parris Island, S.C. ``They are not here because
a judge said you should go here. Our population comes with a lot
more positive attitudes.''


He said that when ``a kid graduates from Parris Island, he is
just beginning a four- or five-year enlistment in the Marine Corps.
It is not like they spend 11 months here and we just throw them out
onto the streets.''


Then, too, the Marines traditionally chooses the best of its
noncommissioned officers as boot camp instructors. By contrast,
state standards vary widely.


Rumors began to surface of beatings at Maryland's boot camps
last August, and Ms. Townsend ordered an end to all inappropriate
physical contact. But news reports in December suggesting such
violations had continued led Ms. Townsend and Glendening to launch
an investigatory task force chaired by former Baltimore Police
Commissioner Bishop Robinson, who also spent 10 years in charge of
the state's prison system.


On Dec. 15, the task force released a report that accused guards
of routine and brutal beatings of inmates, and Glendening and Ms.
Townsend suspended the state's camps and dismissed the top five
juvenile justice officials.


(MORE)


nn

