
The NFL opens the 21st century today by taking a big
step backward.


The final Sunday of the season finds four 7-8 teams trying to
get into the playoffs. If Detroit loses at Minnesota, it will be
the first season in which two 8-8 teams advanced to the postseason.


In the NFC, Dallas, Carolina, Green Bay and the New York Giants
will be doing some scoreboard watching.


In early games, Green Bay hosts Arizona and Carolina hosts New
Orleans. If the Packers and Panthers win, they'll be rooting for
the Giants.


The Cowboys are in the playoffs if they beat the Giants in a 4
p.m. game in Dallas. If the Cowboys lose, the Packers could claim
the NFC's final postseason spot over New York and Carolina. Green
Bay has the most net points in conference games among the three
teams.


``It'd be nice to get in. Whether we deserve it or not doesn't
matter,'' Packers quarterback Brett Favre said. ``We'll see what
happens. I don't have my bags packed yet. Some might, but I
don't.''


Elsewhere, three division titles will be decided.


``We're one week away from single elimination,'' Titans coach
Jeff Fisher said. ``If that doesn't get your attention, nothing
will.''


AFC East: Division champ Indianapolis (13-2) travels to Buffalo
(10-5), where the Colts have lost 10 of their past 11 games.


If both Indy and the Jaguars (13-2) win, Jacksonville gets
home-field advantage throughout the playoffs, unless the Colts beat
the Bills by 14 more points than the Jags beat the Bengals.


Meanwhile, Miami (9-6) visits Washington for what could be
quarterback Dan Marino's last game as a Dolphin. If Miami wins and
either Kansas City or Seattle lose, the Dolphins earn the last AFC
wild-card berth.


AFC Central: The Titans (12-3) can win the division with a
victory at Pittsburgh and a Jacksonville loss. Tennessee would get
home-field advantage throughout the playoffs if the Titans win and
Indy and Jacksonville both lose.


AFC West: The Seahawks (9-6) will win the division if they beat
the Jets at the Meadowlands. If Seattle loses, Kansas City wins the
AFC West if the Chiefs beat the Raiders in Arrowhead Stadium for
the 12th time in a row. A loss to the Raiders would knock the
Chiefs out of playoffs. A win would give Kansas City at least a
wild-card spot.


NFC East: The Cowboys (7-8) can clinch the final NFC wild-card
spot by beating the Giants in Texas Stadium, where Dallas has won
six of its past seven games.


New York needs Arizona to win at Green Bay. The Giants would
technically still be alive if the Packers win, but New York would
have to beat the Cowboys by 56 points more than Green Bay's margin
of victory over the Cardinals.


NFC Central: Tampa Bay (10-5) can capture its first division
title since 1981 by winning at Chicago.


Tampa Bay is 0-17 in games played when the temperature at
kickoff is below 40 degrees, and six of those losses were at
Chicago's Soldier Field. Today's forecast call for a high of 34
with lows near 23.


The Vikings (9-6) can win the division and a first-round bye if
they beat the Lions and the Bucs lose.


NFC West: The Rams (13-2) have clinched the division, a
first-round bye and home-field advantage throughout the playoffs.


The Panthers' (7-8) playoff chances are slim. Carolina would
have to beat the Saints and needs the Giants to upset the Cowboys.
If the Panthers, Packers and Giants win, Carolina would have to
make up an 18-point deficit in net conference points to Green Bay.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

