
Dick Young (1918-1987)


He revolutionized sports coverage when, as a beat reporter for
The Daily News assigned to the Brooklyn Dodgers in the early 1940s,
he began to go into the clubhouse after games to find out what the
players had seen and thought during the game. Before this,
reporters in the press box wrote solely what the reporters had seen
and thought during a game. In 1957, Young began writing his column,
``Young Ideas,'' after the team owner, Walter O'Malley, decided to
move the Dodgers to Los Angeles. In 1982 he moved on to The New
York Post. Writing with wit and a hard-hitting, direct style, he
was frequently in verbal battles with an assortment of sports
figures throughout his years as a columnist.


The following is from a 1957 column:


``This is called an obit, which is short for obituary. An obit
tells of a person who has died, how he lived, and of those who live
after him. This is the obit on the Brooklyn Dodgers.


``Preliminary diagnosis indicates that the cause of death was an
acute case of greed, followed by severe political implications. ...
and, now, Walter O'Malley leaves Brooklyn a rich man and a despised
man.''


Jim Murray (1919-1998)


Murray, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1990, began his career as a
reporter for The New Haven Register. He moved on to write for The
Los Angeles Examiner, Time magazine and Sports Illustrated, before
joining The Los Angeles Times as a sports columnist in 1961. He
soon became widely syndicated, and was highly praised for his
acerbic wit (and, not surprisingly, highly denounced by some of the
subjects of his wit). But, like all good writers, he could also
touch a sensitive chord.


From a column in 1979, in which he tells of the loss from an
operation of his ``good eye'' _ the other eye had seen only a hazy
world _ and now admitted that he was virtually blind: ``I'd like to
see Sugar Ray Robinson or Muhammad Ali giving a recital, a ballet,
not a fight. Also, to be sure, I'd like to see a sky full of stars,
moonlight on the water, and yes, the tips of a royal flush peaking
out as I fan out a poker hand, and, yes, a straight two-foot putt.


``Come to think of it, I'm lucky. I saw all of those things. I
see them yet.''

