
The significance of the 2000 campaign reaches far beyond the
White House. It is no exaggeration to say that all three branches
of government are at stake. Democrats need a net gain of only six
seats to retake control of the House. It is far less likely that
Republicans will lose the Senate, although Democrats could pick up
seats. And because of expected retirements, the next president may
well fill between three and five vacancies on the Supreme Court.


And the election of state legislators in November is critically
important. Nearly two dozen legislative chambers are so evenly
divided that either party could win control of them. But those
legislators, along with the governors, will use results of the 2000
census to redraw boundaries of districts of congressional
candidates in 2002 and the four subsequent elections. The process
could affect who controls the House of Representatives for years.


Still, with the exception, perhaps, of the expected high-octane
match between Hillary Rodham Clinton and New York Mayor Rudolph
Giuliani for a Senate seat from New York, the presidential
competition is certain to command the most interest.


``Probably in March of last year I thought, `I bet I don't get
very worked up about this,''' said Tom Brokaw, anchor of the NBC
Nightly News, who expects that his program will soon begin
broadcasting campaign stories every day. ``But people are slowly
awakening that there's a real race going on here. McCain and
Bradley have opened the door to a lot of public interest.''


In fact, one explanation for the allure of the McCain and
Bradley insurgencies is that some journalists, as well as ordinary
voters, seem charmed by them personally _ and have a hankering for
some drama.


Despite the ferment in New Hampshire, history is on the side of
Gore and Bush. Gore's advisers reel off their institutional
advantages _ from the power of the White House to committed
delegates to endorsements from labor groups to important elected
officials _ that have dragged their predecessors across the finish
line.


Karl Rove, the mastermind of the Bush operation, recites the
history like a mantra. ``No Republican candidate who has led by
double digits in August of the Gallup Poll the year before the
election has failed to win the nomination,'' he explained. ``If
history is the guide, Bush stands a very good chance of being the
Republican nominee for president.''


But this is no ordinary presidential year. No one knows how the
short-circuited season will alter the dynamic and, ultimately,
affect who comes out on top.


Most strategists on both sides agree that Bradley has a better
chance of toppling Gore than McCain does of snatching the
nomination from Bush, because the Democrats are evenly matched
financially. In addition, while McCain is concentrating his
resources in New Hampshire, Bradley has assembled a national
organization.


This much seems clear: The New Hampshire primary is a
make-or-break battle for McCain and Bradley. That is where they
have made the most impressive showings. And they are each counting
on wins there to energize their candidacies _ and to demonstrate
that Gore and Bush are not invincible.


``If McCain wins there, I'm not sure he's very well poised to
convert that into a national campaign,'' said William Mayer, a
political scientist at Northeastern University in Boston.
``Bradley's better positioned to do that. He's managed to stay
pretty even with Gore in fund raising.''


Because of the high expectations in the Granite State, Bradley
and McCain no longer have the luxury of sneaking up on the
front-runner _ as Gary Hart did against Walter Mondale in 1984.


After their charmed campaigns in 1999, Bradley and McCain are
certain to face tougher scrutiny in coming weeks from their
opponents and from the news media. And a loss in New Hampshire
could be devastating to either politician, not only because of
expectations but because their opponents have established
``firewalls'' with potent organizations in several of the
subsequent primary states.


But the Bradley and McCain camps contend that if they win New
Hampshire, the excitement and momentum after those triumphs would
allow them to trump the institutional advantages of Bush and Gore.
After New Hampshire, Republicans have showdowns in South Carolina
on Feb. 19 and Arizona and Michigan on Feb. 22 before the
multistate voting on March 7. But the Democrats will have a
five-week breather between New Hampshire and the March 7 contests.


Former Sen. Warren Rudman, R-N.H., who backs McCain, said his
candidate and Bradley are poised to do well with independent voters
in his state. And victories there, he said, could make them
unstoppable.


``I can't remember when you had it on both sides like this,''
Rudman said. ``Bradley and McCain are both going to take huge
chunks of independent voters.'' Arguing that McCain has potential
for far more than prevailing in New Hampshire, he added, ``People
are whistling through the cemetery if they think that's going to be
the end of it.''


(MORE)


nn

