
Bengals receiver Carl Pickens criticized owner and
general manager Mike Brown, who last week decided to keep coach
Bruce Coslet for at least one more season.


``I don't understand it,'' Pickens said. ``We're trying to win.
We're trying to turn this thing around out there. And they bring
him back. What can you do? Obviously, the players don't call the
shots around here.''


Pickens later issued a statement retracting his comments, but
the damage seemed to be done.


``I learned a long time ago you can't please everybody,'' Coslet
said. ``I prefer to put my focus on all the players that have
supported me, not only publicly but individually and privately. I
think I have my team's support. I think that's never been a
question.''


Going into today's game at Jacksonville, Cincinnati is 21-35 in
3 1/2 seasons under Coslet. The Bengals are 52-107 in the 1990s,
officially making them the worst team of the decade.


Uncertain future in Buffalo


The 49ers and Cowboys aren't the only NFL teams with an aging
core of stars. The Bills also face an uncertain future.


Andre Reed, the team's all-time leading receiver, might play his
last game today at home against the Colts. Reed, 35, has a $2.375
million cap charge in 2000, including a $1.775 million base salary.
His role has diminished over the second half of the season.


Defensive end Bruce Smith's cap figure will be $5.448 million
next season, and running back Thurman Thomas' about $2 million.


The Bills probably can't keep all three players and re-sign
guard Ruben Brown, receiver Eric Moulds, safety Kurt Schulz and
cornerback Thomas Smith, all of whom are eligible for free-agency
after the season.


``There's just a lot of things you have to look into,'' Thomas
said. ``I think that's going to be left up to (general manager)
John Butler and (owner) Ralph Wilson, whether they want us around
here or not.''


Cleveland QB likes Warrick


For the second year in a row, the expansion Browns will have the
No. 1 pick in April's draft. And Cleveland quarterback Tim Couch
already is lobbying general manager Dwight Clark to pick Florida
State receiver Peter Warrick.


Couch, the top pick in 1999 from Kentucky, joked he might stroll
past Clark's office ``and just kind of yell the little Florida
State fight song.''


``I think (Warrick) is a good player,'' Couch said. ``I think he
can help us out a lot and give us somebody to go along with Darrin
Chiaverini and Kevin Johnson and give us that good third receiver.
I think he'd fit in real well.''


Even Clark somewhat tipped his hand. Warrick and Penn State
linebacker Lavar Arrington and defensive end Courtney Brown are
considered the top three prospects for the draft.


``I think we have to get Tim Couch some weapons,'' Clark said.
``I think he's proven he can be a great quarterback in this league.
He's got a lot of development to go through yet, but he's shown
signs of brilliance, and I think he'll continue to get better. So,
we have to get him some weapons to go to, and we have to protect
him.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

