
Photo and graphics information and editors' names can be found
at the end of this budget.


THE WEEKEND DUTY EDITORS ARE:


IN ATLANTA: Greg Laudick 404-526-5456.


IN WASHINGTON: Andy Alexander 202-887-8334.


Y2K


Y2K-MAIN _ WASHINGTON _ As the world recovers from millennial
celebrations, we get a clear-eyed assessment of how everyone
survived the threat of a Y2K meltdown and terrorist attacks. Story
will wrap in all major developments. (Geewax, Cox News Service)
MOVED


RUSSIA-Y2K _ MOSCOW _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Coker, Special to Cox News Service) MOVED


ISRAEL-Y2K _ JERUSALEM _ The first day of business of the new
millennium in the Arab world. (Kaplow, Cox News Service) MOVED


BRITAIN-Y2K _ LONDON _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Roughton, Cox News Service)


MEXICO-Y2K _ MEXICO CITY _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Contreras, Special to Cox News Service) MOVED


CARIBBEAN-Y2K _ ST. CROIX, U.S. Virgin Islands _ A postcard from
the edge: possible first-person account on the first day of the new
millennium. (Williams, Cox News Service) MOVED


ITALY-Y2K _ ROME _ The first day of the new millennium, and
coverage of the first papal address for World Peace Day and the
opening of the Holy Door at Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica by Pope
John Paul II. (Freeman, Special to Cox News Service) MOVED


MILLENNIUM-TELEVISION _ A review of how the networks handled
coverage of the arrival of the new millennium. (Jubera, Atlanta
Journal-Constitution)


NATIONAL


OLYMPICS-FUNDING _ Already threatening to cut off American
corporate dollars that bankroll the Olympics, Congressional critics
now are outraged about the increasing amount of federal funds going
to prepare U.S. cities to host the Games. The government plans to
spend a breathtaking $1.4 billion on the 2002 Salt Lake City Games,
more than twice the $605 million spent on the much larger Atlanta
Olympics in 1996, congressional investigators reported last week.
(Turner Atlanta Journal-Constitution). 30.


POLITICS


BRADLEY-STYLE _ Something about putting on shorts every night
for years and dribbling a ball before thousands changes the way a
performer reacts in front of crowds. The tension of stage fright,
common among those who act, play the concert piano _ or, in most
cases, run for public office _ is missing. The muscles donit
tighten in the same way and the face assumes a loose, locker-room
quality of disregard for the attention being focused on it. As much
as any of the traditional Democratic initiatives he proposes in his
platform, this low-key demeanor, epitomized by the throat lozenge
tumbling constantly in his mouth during his speeches, distinguishes
former Sen. Bill Bradley out on the stump. (Bradley, Atlanta
Journal-Constitution). MOVED


POLITICAL-NOTES _ Mark Sherman's political notes. (Sherman,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


BUSINESS


STOCK-OPTIONS _ More and more employers are awarding employees
stock options. We'll look at who's getting them and strategies for
making stock options part of your compensation package. (Mallory,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution) MOVED


DOW-2000 _ If you're reading this, congratulations, it means you
survived Y2K. More to the point, it means you can probably look
forward to another good year of economic and stock market growth,
as amazing as that seems. (Walker, Atlanta Journal-Constitution).
MOVED


COXNET BUDGET INFORMATION FOR SUBSCRIBERS OF THE NYT NEWS
SERVICE


Spot news budgets move daily at 2 p.m. and 6 p.m. Eastern.
Additionally, separate features and commentary budgets move at 10
a.m., and sports and business budgets at 6 p.m. Additional updates
are possible if news developments warrant.


All times are Eastern unless otherwise noted. PLEASE NOTE:
SPORTS STORIES will have an E.T.A. of 9:30 P.M. If news, business
or features stories will move after 8 p.m., an ETA will be given.


PHOTOS, LAYOUTS and GRAPHICS


CoxNet layouts are for sale over the web, through the New York
Times News Service's PageExpress service, at
www.nytsyn.com/syndicate/pageex.


If a budget line or story is marked with photos or graphics,
those are available from the New York Times News Service at
212-556-4204. Or call CoxNet for more information at 404-526-5456.


HOW TO REACH US


Questions should be directed to CoxNet, the Cox News Service, in
Atlanta at 404-526-5456. We are staffed 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Monday-Friday, and 1-10 p.m. on weekends and holidays.


The news manager is Paul Foutch, 404-526-5429,
pfoutch(at)coxnews.com.


The day news editor is Tom Oder, 404-526-5887,
toder(at)coxnews.com.


The night news editor is Todd C. Duncan, 404-582-7282,
tduncan(at)coxnews.com.


Cox Washington Bureau:


News editor Art Dalglish, 202-887-8338, artd(at)coxnews.com


Foreign editor Rick Christie, 202-887-8316, rickc(at)coxnews.com


Bureau chief Andy Alexander, 202-887-8334, andya(at)coxnews.com


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

ATTENTION EDITORS: The following photos are part of tonight's
New York Times Photo Package, moving Saturday, 01/01/00. Photo
clients will automatically receive these photos via AP's
PhotoExpress or may download them from either the Wieck Photo
Database in Dallas at 972-392-0888 or from NYTPhotos on Newscom at
305-448-8411. Non-clients can make individual purchases by calling
(888) 603-1036 or 212-556-4204.
	(NYT10) NEW YORK -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- RUN-BEAMON-FAMILY-2 -- Naomi
Beamon, who died shortly after this photograph with her son, Bob,
was taken. Finding out the truth about his past has helped Beamon,
the record-setting long jumper during the 1968 Olympics, live in
the present. In his recently published autobiography, ``The Man Who
Could Fly'' (Genesis Press), Beamon describes how, at age 35, he
finally summoned the courage to confront his grandmother about a
lifetime of things left unsaid. Only then did he discover he had
been lied to. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)
	(NYT9) NEW YORK -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- RUN-BEAMON-FAMILY-1 -- Bob
Beamon, 53, and his wife, Milana, left, listen to his great-aunt,
Emmie King, who wanted to raise him. Finding out the truth about
his past has helped Beamon, the record-setting long jumper during
the 1968 Olympics, live in the present. In his recently published
autobiography, ``The Man Who Could Fly'' (Genesis Press), Beamon
describes how, at age 35, he finally summoned the courage to
confront his grandmother about a lifetime of things left unsaid.
Only then did he discover he had been lied to. (Don Hogan
Charles/The New York Times)
	(NYT8) NEW YORK -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- -HYPE-MILLENNIUM -- Edward
Woodyard, a screenwriter from Armonk, N.Y., in a room at the
Marriot Marquis in Times Square, which he reserved for the
millenium celebration 16 years ago. With him is his wife Nancy. The
Marriot was only a half-finished skeleton of steel and concrete
when he made the plans. ``2000 was worth the wait,'' he says.'' I
was almost speechless. I don't have words for it.'' (Jeffery A.
Salter/The New York Times)
	(NYT7) NEW YORK -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- LEGALIZING-MARIJUANA -- Ethan
A. Nadelmann, director of the Lindesmith Center, a drug policy
center set up in New York with money donated by the billionaire
George Soros. Nadelmann calls the war on drugs a ``fundamental
evil.'' ``There never has been a drug-free society,'' says
Nadelmann. ``We must learn how to live with drugs so they cause the
least possible harm and the best possible good.'' (Vincent
Laforet/The New York Times)
	(NYT6) NEW YORK -- Jan 1, 2000 -- MACY'S-WINDOW-WEDDING -- Tracy
Crinion and Greg Nahas of Hoboken, N.J., embarce after getting
married in one of Macy's 34th Street windows on New Year's Day. The
wedding was first prize in an essay contest. The couple also won a
trip to Aruba for their honeymoon. (Chris Maynard/The New York
Times)
	(NYY5) NEW YORK -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- NEWYEARS-ARIEL-FLOATER -- As
up to two million people packed midtown Manhattan on Friday to ring
in a new century, lights from buildings all around Times Square and
up and down Broadway provided quite a show for spectators from all
around the world. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)
	(NYT4) PALO ALTO, Calif. -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- Y2K-WHAT-PROBLEMS-2
-- Deb Leavitt, seated, and Carson Kan monitoring Hewlett-Packard's
computer systems at a company command center on over New Year's.
Although few problems were reported worldwide, many computer
experts warn that significant problems could still emerge in the
months to come if less critical or less frequently used computers,
programs or microchips belatedly become confused. And little of the
world's vast array of financial and office computing systems will
face real-world Year 2000 conditions until business resumes Monday.
(Peter DaSilva/The New York Times)
	(NYT3) PLANO, Texas -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- SUB-Y2K-WHAT-PROBLEMS-1
-- Computer monitoring centers like the one at Electronic Data
Systems in Plano, reported few problems as they kept watch over New
Year's. Yet many computer experts warn that significant problems
could still emerge in the months to come if less critical or less
frequently used computers, programs or microchips belatedly become
confused. And little of the world's vast array of financial and
office computing systems will face real-world Year 2000 conditions
until business resumes Monday. (Mark Graham/The New York Times)
	(NYT2) PLANO, Texas -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- Y2K-WHAT-PROBLEMS-1 --
Computer monitoring centers like the one at Electronic Data Systems
in Plano, reported few problems as they kept watch over New Year's.
Yet many computer experts warn that significant problems could
still emerge in the months to come if less critical or less
frequently used computers, programs or microchips belatedly become
confused. And little of the world's vast array of financial and
office computing systems will face real-world Year 2000 conditions
until business resumes Monday. (Mark Graham/The New York Times)
	(NYT1) OSH, Kyrgyzstan -- Jan. 1, 2000 -- KYRGYZSTAN-EPIC -- A
girl at a school in Osh, Kyrgyzstan, recites lines from the epic
poem about Manas. The poem has been handed down orally for
generations by Manaschis, masters of recitation who chant it at
festivals and other gatherings, and has now become a moral and
ideological text for the nation's youth. Because there has never
been an authoritative text, each Manaschi can weave in original
lines, and even episodes and characters. The greatest of them are
revered as prodigious creators in their own right. (Staton R.
Winter/The New York Times)
	The New York Times News Service
