
About a third of the new buses _ 356 in all _ would be express
coaches serving commuters to Manhattan. Those models, similar in
design to long-distance buses, would use standard diesel engines.


And along congested, heavily used routes, the authority wants to
add 400 ``articulated'' buses _ oversize vehicles that bend in the
middle vaguely like an accordion. They are 50 percent larger than
standard buses and use diesel engines.


By 2005, with these purchases and with the retirement of older
buses, the current fleet of 4,300 will have been reduced to 3,900
buses, but it will include faster and bigger ones that can carry
more passengers.


Christopher P. Boylan, the authority's deputy executive
director, said diesel engines were the only proven technology
available to power the new express coaches and articulated buses.
Even so, Boylan said, the faster and bigger buses will reduce
pollution, both because newer diesel engines will emit less
pollution and because bigger and faster buses will increase the
efficiency of the transit system.


By carrying more riders greater distances, he said, more people
will be encouraged to ride buses, which will in turn reduce traffic
and pollution.


But advocates for riders and environmental groups contend that
the health risks of diesel emissions outweigh the gains in
efficiency. A series of medical studies across the country by such
groups as the California Scientific Review Panel and the American
Journal of Public Health have established a direct link between
diesel emissions and respiratory ailments.


At the same time, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
in Atlanta and others have documented a sharp rise in asthma and
other respiratory diseases in New York City and other urban areas.
Recent studies by New York state's Department of Environmental
Conservation have shown particularly high levels of soot from
diesel exhaust in Midtown Manhattan and other congested city
neighborhoods.


Although the chief cause of such pollution is diesel truck
traffic, critics of the transportation authority argue that it
should lead the way in reducing air pollution.


Gene Russianoff, a staff lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign,
an advocacy group for riders, said passengers would be served just
as effectively by more standard-size natural gas buses on the same
routes where the MTA plans to use the larger articulated models.


And despite the authority's assertion that the express coaches
must use diesel, other critics note that New Jersey Transit uses 50
express models, similar to the ones sought by the authority but
slightly smaller, that run on compressed natural gas. They are made
in Illinois.


The MTA does plan to buy some natural gas models for its
standard buses, but the authority appears to be betting heavily on
the hybrid electric-diesel engine, which is being developed in a
consortium with Lockheed Martin Corp. The system is powered by a
small diesel engine that constantly charges an electric generator,
producing levels of air pollution that Boylan said were as low as
or lower than compressed natural gas.


After experimenting with 10 of the hybrid electric vehicles for
a year, the authority made its first major commitment to the
technology in December when it ordered 125 of them, even without
the financing sought in its five-year plan. Reuter of New York City
Transit said the hybrid buses had been purchased without
competitive bidding because only one company manufactures them.


The company, the Control Systems division of Lockheed Martin,
based in Johnson City, N.Y., has developed the engine over 10
years, with a combination of $10.4 million in grants and
low-interest loans from the New York Power Authority and the
state's Energy Research and Development Authority. The hybrid
engines are installed in buses produced by two other New York
companies, Orion Bus Industries of Oriskany and Nova Bus of
Schenectady.


Boylan said the authority was also concerned about high costs
associated with compressed natural gas. The city's bus depots must
be renovated to handle the gas under extremely high pressure, he
said, and the natural gas buses in the fleet break down more
frequently than the diesel buses.


The hybrid buses would not require any expensive changes to the
depots and could be deployed more quickly at a time when ridership
is increasing rapidly, he said.


But the MTA's critics say the authority is making a major
commitment to a technology that remains experimental, while
neglecting to upgrade its depots to prepare for one that is already
widely available.


``The MTA already has a track record of delay and evasion in
moving into a compressed natural gas technology that has been
proven around the country,'' Russianoff said. He said the hybrid
buses ``simply may not work, and we will find ourselves five years
later incurring the expense of a technology they don't like.''


Russianoff and other advocates of buses using compressed natural
gas say the authority should move much more aggressively in
renovating the depots to handle the high-pressure fueling systems
required.


Of the 22 depots, only one has been equipped to serve the
authority's 89 natural gas buses.


Those buses were sidelined for most of December, MTA officials
said, after a series of small explosions forced that depot, in
Sunset Park, Brooklyn, to shut down in late November. Three transit
workers were injured and hospitalized, and two of them may have
suffered permanent hearing loss, Reuter said. The depot reopened on
Dec. 25.

