
Wile E. Coyotes


Phoenix's decision to dangle stars Keith Tkachuk and Jeremy
Roenick as trade bait could have ramifications on a team that has
been playing well under first-year coach Bobby Francis. The
Coyotes, who are losing an average of $10 million a season and will
continue to operate in the red for two years until they move into
their new arena, want to dump a contract. Roenick will make $5
million next season, then become an unrestricted free agent.
Tkachuk's deal balloons from $4.3 million to $8.3 million next
year. Carolina owner Peter Karmanos called it ``a stupid
contract.'' (amusing considering this is the guy who signed Sergei
Fedorov to a six-year, $38 million offer sheet). Now that Tkachuk
and Roenick know they're on the block, how will the team's two best
players perform? Tkachuk said, ``I want to play here. I want to
spend the rest of my life here. It's about the money. I'm not
worried about it. I'm sure they've thought about trading everybody.
I've been through this a lot. They haven't traded me yet. If they
do, my wife will be devastated. So will I.''


Sharks take big risk


San Jose's decision to deal veteran backup goalie Mike Vernon to
Florida leaves 24-year-old Evgeni Nabokov as the only safety net if
Steve Shields is injured. But the Sharks felt they needed to add
toughness. That's why they immediately moved Radek Dvorak (acquired
from the Panthers) to the New York Rangers for Todd Harvey. The
right winger has been injury prone and has only three goals in 31
games this year, but Sharks GM Dean Lombardi said, ``Harvey's the
type of guy I'd affectionately say is a jerk to play against. It's
something we felt we had to add to this group. Nobody is saying
he's a 40-goal scorer, but he does have the ability to chip in. He
plays with a lot of energy. He has shown the ability to be a
leader.''


Briefly . . .


The surprise wasn't that Joe Sakic finally tallied his 1,000th
career point; the surprise was he assisted on a goal by . . . Chris
Dingman? ``That'll be a trivia question: Who's the one that
scored?'' Dingman said. ``I don't know if too many people will know
the answer to that one.'' . . . Sakic becomes an unrestricted free
agent after the season but said he may agree to salary arbitration
and sign a one-year contract with the Avs. ``I'd like to sign a
long-term deal with a no-trade clause,'' he said. ``If I don't,
we'll just do arbitration. I did pretty well (testing the market)
last time, but I like it here and I want to stay here.'' . . .
Calgary defenseman Phil Housley signed a two-year (plus an option)
contract extension with the Flames and passed up unrestricted free
agency after realizing his preferred destination, the expansion
Minnesota Wild, probably wasn't going to sign him. . . . With
several Detroit teammates returning from injuries, rookie Jiri
Fischer lost his dressing stall at Joe Louis Arena and was given a
folding chair near the Gatorade table. ``Youngest player on the
team,'' the 19-year-old said. ``That's the way it goes.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

