
Grant Long, whose loss to Vancouver left the Hawks
without a rudder, finally is playing after suffering a concussion
and a cartilage injury. In a 100-93 loss to Philadelphia, Long had
eight rebounds in 22 minutes. He talked about his excitement at
playing again.


``I don't know if you guys watch major league baseball a lot,''
Long said, ``but Sammy Sosa is one of my favorite players, and he
takes off from the dugout and he tears out to center field. He's
just happy to be out on the field playing major league baseball,
and that's my appreciation. When I'm out there on the floor, I'm
happy to be playing NBA basketball. I run out there. I'm smiling
because I'm enjoying myself.''


The Grizzlies crowd gave Long a rousing hand. The 33-year-old
did not hold back. He took it hard to the rim against Todd
MacCulloch and George Lynch, drawing a foul and getting to the
line. He crashed with Billy Owens inside, drew a charge on Tyrone
Hill and yelled out the defensive calls.


``It was yeoman's work,'' Shareef Abdur-Rahim said. ``It's what
he brings to the team, just that blue-collar mentality.''


Bryant goes his way


The tug of war continues in Los Angeles: In the final seconds of
a tied game with Dallas, Phil Jackson drew a play for Kobe Bryant
to pass to Glen Rice. Bryant saw an opening he couldn't resist,
drove, got fouled and made the foul shots for the winning points.


``It doesn't matter. If I come off a screen and the guy gives me
the lane, I'm gone,'' Bryant said. On Phil Jackson's reaction: ``He
just kind of looked at me. Just did one of those'' _ the Lakers
guard mimicked Jackson's stare. ``It was like _ it went in. So,
whatever.


Mavs rookie cans another agent


For the second time in his brief, turmoil-filled NBA career,
Mavericks rookie Leon Smith has fired his agent.


Matt Muehlebach was notified of the change Tuesday in a letter
signed by Smith, the 19-year-old who was suspended without pay on
Dec. 6 after two arrests in a 24-hour span. Muehlebach replaced Dan
Fegan.Ostertag awakens


In Utah's victory over Phoenix Tuesday, Greg Ostertag had five
points, two rebounds and two blocks in the fourth quarter. He had
not played in the first three. Jazz forward Karl Malone said, ``He
was as alive as any time I've seen him in the last four or five
years.''... One night later, Jerry Sloan became the third coach in
history to win 600 games with one franchise, when the Jazz beat the
Grizzlies 101-90. He is 600-281 in Utah. The other coaches with 600
wins with one team are Red Auerbach (795, Boston) and Red Holzman
(613, New York).


LaFrentz returning to form


In Denver, Raef LaFrentz continues to play more confidently on
his repaired left knee. Over four games, he scored 81 points and
made 35 of 66 shots. He's shooting 30-for-70 on three-pointers.


The former Kansas star has been working a nearly unstoppable
baseline fadeaway jumper, lofting it over big centers Bryant Reeves
of Vancouver, and the Clippers' Michael Olowokandi and 7-foot-3
Keith Closs. ``That one's been with me since junior high,''
LaFrentz said.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

