
Also, he said, not everybody has the same definition of
multiculturalism. ``The French think that what they call the
Anglo-Saxon model is a multicultural model of integration in which
everybody speaks their own language and doesn't necessarily learn
the common language _ and they don't really become British or
Canadian or American. They simply live in those countries and the
political system sort of stitches together compromises between
these groups.''


``The French image is quite different, but not xenophobic at
all,'' he said, recalling the numbers of Poles, Russians and others
who have settled over the century. Their model, he said, is ``that
anybody of any race, national origin or whatever can become French,
but they've got to really become French _ French defined in French
terms.'' Germany, with an ethnically based view of citizenship, has
had a different debate about immigration, he said.


Policies and programs to overcome hurdles like language barriers
are scant in much of Europe because cultural homogeneity has been
deeply valued, citizenship has often been defined ethnically or
linguistically, and the naturalization process that has made
Americans out of millions of foreigners does not exist.


For example, while Britain may now be the most racially diverse
and integrated nation in Europe, restrictions on immigrants from
outside the European Union remain. Skinhead violence against
non-Europeans has erupted from Scandinavia into Central and Eastern
Europe. In Denmark, a right-wing nationalist leader proposed
recently that all Muslims should be rounded up and put in camps.


``You have European governments that continue to deploy the most
sophisticated forms of immigration control,'' said Arthur C.
Helton, an international lawyer who is now a senior fellow at the
Council on Foreign Relations. ``Yet European societies thirst ever
more for new blood and labor, which will come from outside of
Europe.''


How to manage that? Helton said the example of the United States
is instructive. Immigration there ``has not only inspired but
enforced a set of ways to manage conflict that Europeans are going
to have to either borrow or invent,'' he said. ``There is a
profound recognition by most Americans that this a country more
about change than about status. Europeans had better get ready for
change.''


In Europe, protection of minorities is often seen as enough.
``But people don't want to be beneficiaries of minority rights
arrangements,'' Helton said. ``So there is a dilemma. Immigrants
want to preserve their language and culture but do not wish to be
stigmatized as second-class citizens. That's a delicate balance
that often is missed, and it leads to intolerance, discrimination,
backlash, race riots and the lot.''


Teitelbaum says that this is where political leadership comes
in, and that is as difficult to predict as anything else. With the
combination of low fertility and high immigration, he said, ``you
can have everything from prosperous peace and comity to disastrous,
disintegrative civil war.''


``A lot,'' he said, ``depends on the actions of political
leaderships, to either exploit fears or to try to deal with them.''

