
Copeland H. Marks, the author of 16 cookbooks who
traveled the world in search of remote and exotic cuisines, died
last week in his apartment in Brooklyn Heights. He was 78.


Marks had been in the Foreign Service and the import-export
business before getting a late start writing about food. He began
in 1981 with ``The Indonesian Kitchen'' (Atheneum). His last book
was ``The Exotic Kitchens of Peru'' (M. Evans &AMP; Co., 1999), and he
had recently been working on a book about the foods of the
Senegalese coast. In between, he explored the cooking of Sephardic
Jews and the Jewish community of Calcutta, offered recipes from
Guatemala and the Himalayan rim and brought home the cuisines of
Malaysia, Korea, Burma and North Africa.


``When everybody else was busy writing safe books on pasta, he
was pursuing the exotic and the unusual,'' said Nach Waxman, owner
of Kitchen Arts and Letters, a culinary bookshop on the Upper East
Side.


Copeland Harris Marks was born in Burlington, Vt., in 1921.
After getting a degree in agriculture from the University of
Vermont, he served in World War II, accompanying supplies over the
Burmese hump to Chiang Kai-shek's forces in central China, said
Lawrence Kunin, Marks' cousin. After the war, he joined the Foreign
Service but left after eight years to go into business, importing
and exporting textiles and works of art. He lived for stretches in
Mexico, Guatemala, India and South Africa, and developed his
passion for remote cuisines and cultures.


Later, he settled in Brooklyn Heights and devoted himself to
writing, cooking and lecturing about cuisines he regarded as
unrecognized and underappreciated.


Marks was never trained as a cook, historian or anthropologist,
but he was a quick study. Typically, he would select a region, then
spend anywhere from several weeks to several months there, cooking
with people in their houses. On returning to New York, he would
seek out people from the area he was studying and cook extensively
with them. It was a method that raised doubts among many food
professionals about the depth of his scholarship.


``He did stuff that nobody else did, and that made it
valuable,'' said Cara de Silva, a food writer. ``But when you go
someplace for a brief period of time and then you're writing about
it, it's necessarily going to be somewhat superficial.''


Marks himself was the first one to play down his credentials,
said Angela Schuster, a fellow of the Explorers' Club, a New York
organization devoted to preserving the spirit of exploration. Marks
was the chef-in-residence for a series of dinners exploring ancient
cultures.


Marks never married. Along with his cousin, he leaves two
sisters, Doris Becker and Charlotte Raboy, and a brother, Norman
Marks, all of Los Angeles.


While Marks' eternal search for the exotic led him around the
world, he also hoped that one day it would lead him home, said
David Karp, a food writer. ``The joke was always that the next book
would be `The Jewish Cooking of Vermont,''' Karp said.

