
When voters in Maine went to the polls in November and endorsed
the use of marijuana as a medicine, it was more than a victory for
cancer patients and others who say marijuana will help relieve
their pain.


For a small coalition of libertarians, liberals, humanitarians
and hedonists, the vote was another step forward in a low-profile
but sophisticated crusade to end the nation's criminal laws against
marijuana and other psychoactive drugs.


Using polls, focus groups and advertising, the coalition has
selected and promoted causes that might arouse sympathy among
Americans, like giving clean syringes to heroin users to prevent
the spread of AIDS or softening tough penalties for drug use. The
most successful has been medicinal marijuana, which has been
endorsed by the District of Columbia and seven states.


What brought together the disparate elements of the coalition,
however, is a far broader cause: changing the critical way that
Americans think about drugs. Proponents say they want to end a war
on drugs that has packed prisons, offered addicts little treatment
and contributed to the spread of AIDS. Some want to go further and
drop criminal penalties for personal drug use, or even make drugs
legal.


The term they have carefully crafted for their goal is ``harm
reduction'': reducing the harm caused by those people who cannot or
will not stop using drugs.


``We accept drugs are here to stay,'' said Ethan A. Nadelmann,
director of the Lindesmith Center, a drug policy center set up in
New York with money donated by the billionaire George Soros.
``There never has been a drug-free society,'' Nadelmann said. ``We
must learn how to live with drugs so they cause the least possible
harm and the best possible good.''


Critics say the agenda is more ominous: the legalization of
marijuana and other drugs. At a congressional hearing in June, the
White House director of national drug policy, Gen. Barry R.
McCaffrey, warned of ``a carefully camouflaged, well-funded,
tightly knit core of people whose goal is to legalize drug use in
the United States.''


Sue Rusche, director of Families in Action, a coalition in
Atlanta working to help parents prevent children from using drugs,
accused Nadelmann and his supporters of systematically distorting
the picture of what drugs do.


``Yes, we're concerned about children, but we're concerned about
everybody,'' said Ms. Rusche, who likened Nadelmann to the tobacco
industry. ``He denies that drugs have the capacity to hurt people,
and takes no responsibility for the consequences.''


Nadelmann describes his position differently. ``Drugs are not
bad,'' he said. ``Drugs are good, bad or indifferent, depending on
how you use them.''


The movement's supporters range beyond the Lindesmith Center and
other efforts financed by Soros. Supporters include
marijuana-smokers represented by the National Organization for the
Reform of Marijuana Laws, or Norml, libertarians who argue that
personal drug use is nobody else's business, and old-fashioned
liberals who castigate the government's campaign against drugs as
worse than the problem.


``The core is the people who to my mind get it, the people who
connect the dots,'' Nadelmann said. ``We believe that the war on
drugs is a fundamental evil in our society.''


The crusade to make drugs socially respectable has no precedent
in the United States, said Dr. David F. Musto, a medical historian
at the Yale School of Medicine and the author of ``The American
Disease: Origins of Narcotics Control'' (Oxford University Press).


``You have these groups funded by wealthy individuals that are a
constant critic of drug policy, and these groups use very
sophisticated marketing techniques,'' he said.


Surveys show that most Americans still oppose making illicit
drugs legal. While voters have been tolerant of letting ill people
smoke marijuana, a Gallup poll this year reported that 69 percent
of respondents opposed making marijuana legal for everyone.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


Mark A.R. Kleiman, a professor of public policy at the
University of California at Los Angeles, said, ``When you look at
all these medical marijuana initiatives, they pass by big margins,
but the governors and legislators go the other way.''


Because constituents expect their politicians to be hard-nosed,
Kleiman said, ``a legislator who votes for medical marijuana could
lose votes from people who voted for medical marijuana.''


Nadelmann said he commissioned a poll to learn whether voters
would support personal cultivation of marijuana; 65 percent of
those sampled thought that growing marijuana should remain a crime.


The result of this research into public attitudes has been the
deliberately vague idea of harm reduction. By casting the issue in
friendlier terms that resonate across the political spectrum,
crusaders like Nadelmann say, they hope to induce Americans to
tolerate, if not embrace, the elimination of criminal penalties
against marijuana _ and as a few see it, the eventual legalization
of all psychoactive drugs.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


Critics call the medicinal marijuana issue a stalking-horse for
drug legalization. ``My guess is the real agenda is to promulgate
marijuana as a benign substance outside the boundaries of
conventional medicine,'' McCaffrey said.


Nadelmann did not contradict him. ``Will it help lead toward
marijuana legalization?'' he said. ``I hope so.'' But he said that
reports of his support for harder drugs have quoted him out of
context.


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

