
There was no escaping the hideousness of
the waiting, more than two unheated hours of it, in lines snaking
down hallways and up and down stairs and outside in the rain until
the fancily dressed millennium night revelers gradually began to
resemble supplicants in a Depression-era bread line.


But the 10,500 guests to the strictly by-invitation New Year's
Eve extravaganza at the custom-built Millennium Dome here at ground
zero of world time barely complained, having a strong cultural
belief in the dreary inevitability of queues.


They were undoubtedly cheered up, too, by the sight of people
like Sir Christopher Bland, the chairman of the BBC, and Andrew
Motion, Britain's debonair poet laureate, standing wretchedly in
line along with everyone else, waiting to get their tickets and
then to pass through a variety of security checks.


``I don't mind queuing _ it's what we do best,'' said Jeanette
Francis, a clerical officer from York who won a local competition
for tickets to the dome's opening night celebration, the crowning
achievement of the New Labor government's effort to mark the
passing millennium with both a magnificent monument and a party to
end all parties.


Nor did Mrs. Francis complain much when, after finally getting
inside the awesome structure, which dominates the east London
skyline like some sort of wildly lit spaceship, she was made all
too aware of another unpleasant development. Not much of the $1.2
billion spent on building the dome, it seemed, had actually gone to
heat the place.


But in the end, partygoers huddling in evening dresses and
winter coats could not help but be swept up in the grand scale and
euphoria of the occasion.


The centerpiece of the evening, an enormous concert in the
dome's central arena, was organized with split-second precision, so
that midnight _ observed by watching Big Ben toll 12 times on giant
screens next to the stage _ fell at exactly the right time.


The entertainment itself was the result of months of planning
and soul-searching about tradition, innovation and symbolism in a
very old country looking forward to a very new era. In perhaps the
most debated moment in a country made up increasingly of people
from a variety of religions, the archbishop of Canterbury led the
guests in a prayer that was emphatically Christian.


But much of the program was a hodgepodge of the traditional and
the new, fashioned in dizzying sequence from a variety of different
eras and cultures. Handel's ``Let the Bright Seraphim,'' performed
by the opera singer Rosemary Joshua, was sandwiched between ``So
Young,'' by the Irish rock group the Corrs, and the Beatles' ``Let
It Be,'' performed by the singer Heather Small.


There was a version of ``Amazing Grace'' that segued into a
traditional African folk song, with a chorus of hundreds. There was
``Cymru Fach,'' a traditional Welsh song, and ``A New Beginning,''
an almost heartbreakingly beautiful piece by the composer John
Tavener, commissioned to mark the occasion.


After all the singing and prayers and fireworks and laser shows,
there was a huge dance-and-acrobatic extravaganza, with people
dressed as butterflies, ships, dragons and various kinds of
flowers, among other things, with musical influences from Africa
and the Caribbean.


The most amusing moment of the night may have come when the
crowd saw, projected on the screen, the image of Queen Elizabeth,
prim in a little hat, stiffly holding hands with Prime Minister
Tony Blair as everyone sang ``Auld Lang Syne.'' It was unclear,
however, whether the queen herself was actually singing.


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


It remains to be seen how the dome, not the most popular of
projects in Britain after a year of bad press devoted to the
delays, the controversies and the cost, will fare as the yearlong
public spectacle it was intended to be. There was little time at
the party to investigate the various zones that have been built
around the themes of the mind, the body, work, commerce and faith,
among other things, but the government's hope is that it will
become as entrenched in the public consciousness as the Festival of
Britain in 1951.


At the end of the night, after the queen had made her stately
exit, the regular people massed like an army of Cinderellas and
retreated to the subway, only to find that their coach had turned
to a pumpkin once more. ``We are sorry for the delay,'' began the
conductor, as the doors closed and the train went nowhere.


The passengers' British patience finally snapped. The tired,
tipsy, uncomfortable, crowded people let out one anguished
collective groan, undoubtedly the most noise any had ever made on a
subway before. ``Happy New Year,'' said the conductor.

