
Nobody is quite ready to do celebratory swan dives
into the Detroit River just yet. Regular-season victories in
Hockeytown do little except to affirm to fans that forward lines
are set for the playoffs.


But as the NHL season nears the midway point, the Detroit Red
Wings look closer to being a Stanley Cup team now than they did
last year.


The Wings have the best record in hockey, and they continued to
string together wins despite the absences of goalie Chris Osgood
and forward Slava Kozlov. After a narrow 3-2 overtime win over the
Thrashers that locals attributed to post-holiday blahs, Detroit
traveled to Buffalo the next night and waxed the Sabres 7-2. The
team's goals-against average (2.30) is in the top five in the
league, and forwards seemingly produce any time they have to _ or
are prodded into doing so.


``We finally started coming around in the third period of the
Atlanta game,'' assistant coach Dave Lewis said. ``But that's our
team. We have some veteran guys, who, if you watched practice,
you'd wonder how they're able to play in this league. They wait for
the games.''


Last season, they often waited for the games to matter, and then
it was too late. The Wings suffered from some expected post-Cup
blues last season, and it was reflected in their team defense. As a
result, general manager Ken Holland worked several trade-deadline
deals that imported veterans and exported draft picks. However, it
didn't work.


``We started slow last year, but our feeling was in the second
half of the season we would be more consistent,'' he said. ``We
felt we needed to do something to jump start the team. We went
something like 10-1 after the trades, and we won six consecutive
playoff games. But then we had some injuries and Colorado elevated
its game in the playoffs and...''


And the Wings lost. After two consecutive Cups, the perception
was that Holland had mortgaged the future to squeeze one more title
out of the team and failed. Only defenseman Chris Chelios was kept
from last year's trades, and, Lewis said, ``He feels more
comfortable this year. Last season, it took awhile for him to get
adjusted with his family, to the jersey, everything. He almost
tried too hard.''


This year, Chelios leads the NHL in plus-minus at plus-36. He
has been paired with Steve Duchense, whose career appeared dead
after he bombed out with three teams in the span of a year. He has
been rejuvenated in Motown. The other move that has paid off was
unrestricted free agent Pat Verbeek, a key piece to Dallas' Stanley
Cup team. Verbeek had 18 points in his first 23 games and was a
plus-21, second to Chelios on the team.


Dallas hasn't hit its stride yet. Many people think that
Colorado will be a second-half team because of its recent personnel
turnover, but for now it's a .500 club. St. Louis is strong but
can't match Detroit's depth. Phoenix needs to prove it can win a
playoff series.


The Wings' path appears set through the Western Conference
playoffs to the finals.


``It's too early for that,'' Lewis said. ``Being in first place
and the stats and all that is nice, but we're measured by what we
do in the playoffs.''


Holland said, ``We only have a certain amount of time with this
group.'' He said he still thinks that Dallas and Colorado will be
the Wings' primary competition in the playoffs.


But going into a Cup chase not as the defending champions has
advantages.


``Look at Dallas in the first 25 games this year,'' he said.
``It's tough when you play until the middle of June and then have
to get back on the ice for training camp. And then everybody is
judging their year on how they play against you. You're the
measuring stick. It's hard to get pumped up in October.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

