
In a vivid reminder that many people along the
Texas-Mexico border regard the region as one country instead of
two, the mayors of Laredo and its Mexican sister city, Nuevo
Laredo, walked across one of the bridges above the Rio Grande and
celebrated the new millennium with an international hug and a kiss.


``Como esta?'' asked Mayor Betty Flores of Laredo as she greeted
Mayor Horacio Garza Garza of Nuevo Laredo at the halfway point of
International Bridge No. 1.


The meeting on International Bridge No. 1 was freighted with
symbolism for this isolated border region where culture and
nationality seem as blurred and fluid as the Rio Grande itself. A
few hundred people shouted ``Viva Mexico!'' after singing the
Mexican national anthem and then cheered loudly after listening to
``The Star Spangled Banner.''


``Our values have stood the test of time,'' Ms. Flores said in a
short speech.


A day before, on the last day of the 1900s, the scene at the
bridge had been the usual: Old women and cowboys, teen-agers and
tourists and thousands of other people crossed back and forth from
Mexico, some shopping, others coming or going from jobs on one side
of the border or the other. The notion that a line on a map could
create hard boundaries seemed as far-fetched as, say, the world's
changing with the tick of a clock.


``It's like it was one city,'' said Terry Medinilla, a sales
clerk at El Porvenir, a clothing store that depends on customers
walking across the bridge from Mexico. ``We can't be without them,
and they can't be without us.''


By late in the evening, the bridge was empty, closed by
officials for the ``abrazo,'' or embrace, ceremony. At about 11
p.m., Central time, the Mexican mayor and his entourage followed a
contingent of green-helmeted soldiers toward the stone marker
signifying the international boundary. From the American side, Ms.
Flores and members of the local city council walked arm-in-arm to
greet their Mexican counterparts. Four Laredo police officers
carrying the American flag made up a modest color guard.


The future actually arrived in Laredo six years ago. In January
1994, the North American Free Trade Agreement transformed Laredo
into the busiest cargo crossing point on the border. Unemployment
plummeted as 12,000 trucks a day carried goods back and forth. The
trucks have also polluted the air and clogged the roads.


After the embrace and the speeches, the people walked back to
their sides of the river, dividing into two countries once more. In
Nuevo Laredo, a huge red, white and green Mexican flag fluttered
beside the river. On the Laredo side of the river, a few hundred
people attended a free concert. Fireworks crackled from both sides
of the river, as did a more dangerous local New Year's custom,
gunshots fired in celebration into the air.


Then, an hour or so later, the noise subsided, traffic began
flowing across the bridge as the border checkpoints reopened, and
life on the border resumed along the stale, green waters of the Rio
Grande.

