
As racing gets underway in the
semifinals of the Louis Vuitton Cup, the bitter aftertaste of the
rancor between Nippon and the rest of the challengers lingers like
a Y2K/bad wine hangover.


What Peter Gilmour did, said Paul Cayard, head of the San
Francisco-based AmericaOne syndicate Saturday as he looked over the
pairings for the rest of the week's matches, ``is make it very easy
for New Zealand to tell how fast any challenger is and where its
strengths and weaknesses are.''


Last Wednesday, Gilmour, an Australian skippering for the Nippon
Challenge, accepted Team New Zealand's invitation to do some
practice racing, which included long side by side ``drag racing''
and four practice starts.


Under a long-standing Cup tradition, and by an unwritten
agreement among the 11 challengers last September, no challenger is
to help the defender by practice racing, which amounts to sharing
secrets.


By all accounts, New Zealand first used its more experimental
boat against Nippon, then brought out its more conventional boat
and soundly thrashed Gilmour and the Japanese boat, which placed
second on the challengers' list during the first half of the
season.


New Zealand downplays the performance. Said the Kiwis' Tom
Schnackenberg, ``It would take a good two weeks in perfect
conditions to truly compare performances.''


The Nippon/New Zealand scrimmage occurred on a day of light
flukey air and shifty conditions.


Still, as Cayard and others pointed out, self-confidence is a
huge factor in America's Cup racing, and there's a world of
difference between New Zealand not quite knowing if it is up to the
challengers' pace or feeling somewhat paranoid that it may be well
off it, especially after a season in which the challengers beat up
each other daily while New Zealand raced intramurally.


The two warring syndicates _ Dennis Conner's Stars &AMP; Stripes and
Gilmour's Nippon _ are paired for the first day of racing.


If prerace handicapping proves to be as accurate as it was
before the first three rounds, then the prerace talk is worth less
than nothing. The New York Yacht Club's Young America campaign is
the best proof of that. Thought to be a preseason favorite, it was
out of the game surprisingly early.


Other potential dark horses _ Nippon and Stars &AMP; Stripes _ rose
meteorically. According to Conner, the most experienced racer in
New Zealand, the extremely variable and shifty winds in Hauraki
Gulf make any race, in any round, a matter of a lucky draw.


That said, here is a glance at the six challengers, in order of
finish in the trials:


(FR) PRADA from Italy: An extremely good team with two of the
fastest boats in the regatta, developed out of Bill Koch's 1995
boats and technology. The teamwork is solid and skipper Francesco
de Angelis has shown no weakness.


The only negative with Prada is theoretical. Having sailed here
the longest, its early dominance over the later-arriving teams may
have peaked, with the other teams catching up later in the trials.


(FR) NIPPON from Japan: A team that has improved greatly over
the three months of trials. Gilmour, the skipper, is one of the
world's top match racers. The campaign seems to be on a steady rise
in speed and sailing ability.


The negative is that one boat, Idaten, seems steady but slower
than Asura, which is fast but erratic. It will use Asura in this
round.


(FR) AMERICA TRUE from San Francisco: This has been a steadily
improving boat with a thoroughly motivated mixed-gender team led by
syndicate boss Dawn Riley. Its huge success, especially in the last
round, gives it real momentum as the semis begin.


Helmsman John Cutler from New Zealand is a true world-class
journeyman who is a proven winner in any boat, any water. Syndicate
general manager Chris Coffin knows how to run a lean, efficient
organization.


The only negative is America True's single-boat program. To date
that has not been a factor, but could be a potential hindrance,
especially in heavy weather.


(FR) AMERICAONE from San Francisco: A top team in a new, faster
boat is a powerful combination. Add the most formidable skipper in
the regatta, Cayard, and this package has got to rate as a
favorite.


(FR) TEAM DENNIS CONNER from San Diego: The most experienced
team on the water got even better in midseason as Tom Whidden
joined the afterguard calling tactics. Whidden has sailed with
Conner for 20 years and brings not only his wisdom, but a sense of
order. He knows how to keep skipper Ken Read in his comfort zone.
Conner calling syndicate shots _ enough said.


Its potential negative is its one boat geared toward heavy
weather. But on heavy days, vice becomes a virtue. If November's
weather repeats itself, watch out for Stars &AMP; Stripes.


(FR) LE DEFI FRANCAIS from France: Helmsman Bertrand Pace knows
it. The team knows it. Everyone knows it. The French are dangling
by a miracle.

