
When he stands on 42nd Street in Manhattan, Udi Aloni
can see his ideas towering over the milling crowds. And with his
photo-crisp advertisements for Apple Computer, the Gap, Old Navy
and DKNY looming 40 feet high on the faces of skyscrapers, there is
no question that Aloni, a 40-year-old Israeli artist, is making an
impression on the Big Apple. From 10th Avenue to Broadway, Aloni's
huge, high-resolution signs, called wallscapes, overlook every
intersection.


``My goal was to alter the urban landscape without having visual
pollution,'' Aloni said. ``Wallscapes are much more organic to the
city, and I thought it would be cool if I could hang my work on
these buildings.''


Aloni came to New York in 1994 to focus on his art, not to dream
up a new way of displaying commercial advertisements. But when he
looked up at New York's massive buildings, he saw a potential
canvas. He had already experimented with digital printing in his
art _ interactive projects that explore religious themes _ and
realized that the same tools could be used for advertising.


He proposed the idea to NUR MacroPrinters, an Israeli company
that produces a large-format continuous inkjet press. Unlike
painted billboards, wallscapes are printed via disk onto a
lightweight vinyl mesh material and hung flat like posters against
the sides of buildings. Not only are the images razor-sharp, but
they can also be produced faster and removed more quickly and
easily than a painted billboard. From that concept, MegaArt was
born.


Companies like MegaArt are sprouting _ and being snatched up by
larger companies _ to take advantage of the fast-growing and
lucrative large-format digital printing business, which industry
analysts expect to grow to about $10 billion from $1.5 billion in
the next three years. MegaArt's competitors range from huge
billboard companies like Metromedia to small graphic design
businesses.


Familiar names _ the Gap, Apple, DKNY _ are loyal MegaArt
clients. Advertisers create the images and send them via CD-ROM to
MegaArt, which prints them. MegaArt says that it produces about 85
percent of the wallscapes in New York City, and the company has
expanded its work to Israel, Europe and Japan.


In the beginning, Aloni often worked with advertisers to
translate their ideas to his large canvases, and some still seek
his advice.


MegaArt's sales have soared, to $11 million in 1999 from $1.5
million for the fiscal year that ended Aug. 31, 1997. Profits rose
50 percent in the same period, and the number of employees has
increased to 83 from five. The company expects sales to reach $18
million this fiscal year.


MegaArt was acquired in September 1998 for $14.4 million by
Unidigital, a digital printing and media services company in
Manhattan that went public in 1996. Aloni is now the second-largest
shareholder of Unidigital, behind William E. Dye, Unidigital's
chairman. In 1998, Unidigital acquired SuperGraphics, a company in
Sunnyvale, Calif., that makes vinyl ads that wrap around buses.
Aloni runs MegaArt and SuperGraphics under one division.


``Udi is a visionary,'' Dye said. ``His creative insight into
new media concepts makes him really unique.''


MegaArt's workshop, in a 30,000-square-foot renovated warehouse
on Pier 40 at West and Houston Streets, is a bustling production
center with seven printers that roll out gigantic images on the
sturdy vinyl mesh. Although MegaArt's ownership has changed, Aloni
says his mission is the same: to take the company to the next level
artistically.


``I've been freed from the day-to-day numbers and all the things
I'm not so interested in,'' hesaid. ``Now I can concentrate on the
creative side, developing concepts for the future. It's what really
gives me my passion for this business.''


Unidigital's strategy is to incorporate entrepreneurs and let
them develop their businesses. ``There are so many images grabbing
for our attention,'' said Rudolf Hokanson, an analyst who used to
cover the company for CIBC Oppenheimer, the investment bank. ``So
if you can be a master of digital printing, you have a better
chance of being the one who offers a total solution for the
customer.''


Transportation Displays Inc., or TDI, was the first large
company to give MegaArt its business. Bill Murphy, TDI's director
of operations, said he was impressed with both Aloni's artistic
background and his understanding of digital technology.


MegaArt usually has about 25 wallscape projects going on at
once, charging $20,000 to $400,000. TDI spends $3,000 to $300,000 a
year to lease wall space, then sells the space to advertisers for
$5,000 to $50,000 a month, Murphy said.


``Udi is an artist by trade, so he really appreciates the work
we do,'' said Rebecca Weill, a spokeswoman for the Gap. ``He has a
really good eye.''


Since last January, MegaArt has focused on a new concept called
``station domination,'' which means one advertiser buys all the
space at one location for one or two months.


In partnership with TDI, which has franchise agreements with
several transit authorities, including the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, MegaArt prints the images and displays
the work. For example, Pontiac is spending $100,000 a month to
display almost 300 images at the Port Authority bus terminal and
$200,000 a month for 138 ads at the World Trade Center. In the Bond
Street Underground station in London, all the signs were changed to
read ``Blonde Street'' for a Clairol ad campaign.


``They look for ways to service the clients and simplify the
process,'' said Brigg Hyland, vice president for special projects
at TDI. ``That allows the client greater flexibility.''


Aloni used to feel conflicted about his two roles: artist and
entrepreneur. But he said he is over that now. ``My job is to find
cool applications for these new digital tools,'' he said. ``I've
grown as an artist since I started my business. I bring the same
spirit and passion to both parts of my life.''

(For use by New York Times News Service clients)
	The Kansas City Star plans to move the following stories for use
by clients of the NYTimes News Service for AMs and PMs of Sunday,
Jan. 2. If you have any questions, please call The Star's News Desk
at (816) 234-4720.
	ROBBERY-HOSTAGES: (KANSAS CITY, Mo.) _ Bank robbery and hostage
situation in Olathe, Kan., end with arrest of woman. By RICHARD
ESPONOZA, RUTH IGOE and ANNE LAMOY. Story will move in the ``a''
category.
	Y2K-EFFECT: (KANSAS CITY, Mo.) _ Analysis of why Y2K computer
problems turned out to be even less than what experts predicted. By
DAVID HAYES and FINN BULLERS. Story will move in the ``a''
category.
	Y2K-BABY: (KANSAS CITY, Mo.) _ Kansas City area's first Y2K
baby. By STACY DOWNS. Story will move in the ``a'' category.
	GREENE-FRANCHISE: (GRANADA HILLS, Calif.) _ If all goes
according to plan, by the end of this calendar year Maurice Greene
will have a new indelible nickname. ``The Franchise.'' This year,
Greene can win Olympic gold on the world stage in Sydney,
Australia. This year, Greene can take the baton from Tom Watson as
Kansas City's one-man sports franchise and replace Carl Lewis as
the jaw-dropping, breathtaking sprinter who makes track and field
relevant, important and television-friendly in the United States.
At the conclusion of 2000, a Kansas City, Kansan, could be the
Michael Jordan of track and field. Greene has the potential to be
an athletic and commercial endorsement force strong enough to leap
Brush Creek with a single bound and polished enough to hawk
sneakers, cologne and men's briefs in the same advertisement. By
JASON WHITLOCK. Story will move in the ``s'' and ``a'' categories.
	FISHER-FAME: (WAVERLY, Mo.) _ This afternoon Craig Closterman
will don his Chiefs sweatshirt, reach across his bed piled high
with his teddy bears, select one of his five Chiefs caps and then
settle in a recliner to watch the Kansas City-Oakland game. Craig
loves the Chiefs, win or lose. ``Chiefs, Chiefs,'' he said when
queried. Craig, 31, has Down syndrome. Just as many other fans who
watch or listen as exquisitely gifted athletes compete for the big
money, the playoffs, maybe a Super Bowl ring and, perhaps for an
exalted few, a place someday in the National Football League Hall
of Fame in Canton, Ohio. Implausibly, Craig Closterman, a
roundish-faced man just over 5 feet tall, weighing 165 pounds and
with the beginnings of a sand-trap bald spot, knows all about
sports halls of fame. He's in one. By JIM FISHER. Story will move
in the ``a'' category.
	SPORTS BUDGET OFFERS
	CHIEFS-GAME: Kansas City vs. Oakland game coverage.
	WHITLOCK-COLUMN: Jason Whitlock column.
	POSNANSKI-COLUMN: Joe Posnanski column.
	COTTON-GAME: Cotton Bowl game coverage.
