
In a matter of months, this Midwestern small
town of big-city architecture that is a who's who of postwar design
may boast yet another distinction: a group of its buildings is
likely to become the first in modern architecture to win National
Historic Landmark status, an honor more often bestowed on the
nation's earliest buildings.


On one downtown block alone, there is a library by I.M. Pei; a
sculpture by Henry Moore; a church across the street by Eliel
Saarinen; a bank down the block by his son, Eero Saarinen, and a
company headquarters next door designed by Kevin Roche. There are
schools, firehouses, churches, factories and a Cesar Pelli shopping
mall, all part of a collection of about 65 buildings by nationally
known architects.


Not bad for a city of 37,000 nestled between farmland and
factories in the middle of the prairie.


Historians who will evaluate the application said the
architecture here amounts to an unusual grouping of significant
modern buildings. ``It is almost like raisins in a pudding _ you
have all these raisins studding a pudding, and they are all
wonderful in their own right, but it's the combination of all the
raisins that makes the pudding good,'' said Patty H. Henry, a
historian with the National Historic Landmarks division of the
National Park Service.


And these works are found far from American architectural meccas
like Chicago, New York, San Francisco or Boston. ``You're talking
Columbus, Ind.,'' she said. ``To find that little gem of a
collection out there is what makes it unique.''


Architects who have worked here agreed. ``It is at once a
classic American town _ it has a Main Street _ and at the same
time, it has this highfalutin architecture,'' said Robert C.
Venturi, who built Fire Station No. 4 here in 1967. He is now one
of the nation's leading architects, at Venturi, Scott, Brown &AMP;
Associates in Philadelphia. ``I admire the architecture there very
much.''


How did a small city about halfway between Indianapolis and
Louisville, Ky., come by such an astounding collection of modern
architecture? It is, after all, a surprise after the 43-mile drive
south from Indianapolis, where the fields are nearly flat and, at
this time of year, pancake-colored, interrupted by worn-down gray
barns, copses of bare-boned trees and the occasional scruffy silo.


The buildings here reflect another incongruity, a partnership
between heavy industry and high art.


Cummins Engine Co. Inc., a maker of diesel engines and electric
generators, is the patron of this company town and its
architecture. The company's retired chairman, J. Irwin Miller, has
long been a fan of modernists, and in 1957 his company began
financing an unusual architecture program through its nonprofit
foundation, the Cummins Engine Foundation. That jump-started the
effort to persuade notable modern architects to build here.


The foundation pays architectural fees in Columbus' Bartholomew
County for new public buildings and for renovations of existing
buildings, as long as the public agencies agree to choose an
architect from a list of contemporary designers selected by an
independent panel of distinguished architects. Agencies also must
give the architects they hire responsibility for planning and
designing the entire building, including landscaping and
furnishings.


``Good architecture needs a good client as well as a good
architect,'' Venturi said. ``I would love to build another one
there _ it is a sympatico environment.''


The Cummins foundation has spent $13.8 million on 43 projects
since 1957, including 13 new schools, three fire stations, the Post
Office, the triangular City Hall by Edward Charles Bassett and a
number of renovations of existing buildings.


But the nonprofit group's example has also inspired others.
Fewer than half of the notable buildings here have been paid for by
the foundation. The rest have been backed by other local companies,
residents and congregations.


(MORE)


nn

