
Pope John Paul II continued his rigorous
Christmas-time schedule Saturday by opening the Holy Door of the
Basilica Santa Maria Maggiore, one of the four major basilicas in
Rome, and blessing 4,000 marathon runners.


They were among the crush of more than 20,000 gathered in St.
Peter's Square to celebrate New Year's Day, which is observed by
the Roman Catholic Church as World Peace Day.


After opening the Holy Door, the visibly fatigued 79-year-old
pontiff called on those attending the solemn morning ceremony in
Santa Maria Maggiore to regard the tumultuous history of the 20th
Century as a valuable lesson for future international peace.


``In today's message, I have remembered some conditions for
strengthening the path to peace on an international level. . .a
path unfortunately always threatened,'' the pope said. ``How we are
reminded of the painful events that continuously scarred the
history of the 20th Century. Because of this we must now more than
ever wish for peace in the name of God.''


Immediately after the ceremony, John Paul traveled across town
to St. Peter's Basilica where he greeted a crowd of more than
20,000 gathered in St. Peter's Square. He delivered the Papal
Angelus, or ``message at noon,'' and offered a New Year's blessing.


Sticking to the theme of peace, the pontiff told the crowd to
work toward universal reconciliation.


``Yes, Christ is our peace. He calls on us to love every human
being without discrimination, converting the heart and mind to
thoughts of peace, and to distance ourselves from the temptation of
violence and war,'' he declared from the window of the pontifical
apartment overlooking the square.


Among those in the crowded piazza were the 4,000 marathon
runners taking part in the Rome Millennium 2000 Marathon, coined as
``the world's first marathon of the New Millennium.'' Its starting
line was at St. Peter's Square.


John Paul bestowed a special blessing upon the runners, telling
them ``'to take peace with them through the streets of Rome as
peace is also the finish line.''


John Paul has been following a grueling schedule since marking
the start of the Grand Jubilee celebration on Christmas Eve by
opening the Holy Door of St. Peter's Basilica. He has since
presided over daily ceremonies.


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

