
Moving in (w) Washington and (f) financial categories.


By MARILYN GEEWAX


c. 2000 Cox News Service


WASHINGTON _ While country after country continued to report
success this weekend in smothering the Y2K computer bug, U.S.
leaders delayed declarations of victory Saturday. They say the true
test of Y2K will come Monday.


``It isn't over yet,'' said Rep. Steve Horn, R-Calif., chairman
of the House subcommittee that investigated Y2K readiness. ``We
have to see what, if any, damage will be done'' once computers face
the strain of a full work week.


But Horn and other Y2K authorities were greatly encouraged by
initial assessments of the bug, a software flaw that could cause
older computers to misread the two-digit date ``00'' as 1900,
rather than 2000. Without repairs, that seemingly simple
misunderstanding could cause serious equipment malfunctions.


When the date began rolling over on New Year's Day, global
monitors started looking for trouble in telecommunications systems,
power grids, transportation networks and other vital operations.
But many hours into 2000, officials could find no significant Y2K
problems, even in those countries that many had feared were ill
prepared, such as Russia, Ukraine and China.


Bruce McConnell, director of the United Nations-backed
International Y2K Cooperation Center, said Saturday that while he
believes ``we are on the verge of a major success,'' no one will be
sure for several days. In some countries, as many as two out of
three computers won't be turned on during the long weekend, he
said. ``We don't think we're out of the woods yet.''


In the United States, a few banks tried to avoid possible Monday
morning jitters by opening branches Saturday to demonstrate the
smoothness of operations. None reported problems.


But while Y2K authorities say the champagne should stay on ice
through the weekend, they do seem confident that the worst-case
scenarios, such as widespread power blackouts and massive traffic
tie-ups, won't occur.


In assessing why the Y2K effort has been going so well so far,
authorities are virtually unanimous in praising John Koskinen,
chairman of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion.


Koskinen, 60-year-old the former deputy director at the Office
of Management and Budget, was appointed two years ago by President
Clinton to spur business and government officials to fix Y2K bugs.
His no-nonsense approach won over industry leaders, as well as
congressional Republicans, who often are reluctant to take advice
from Clinton appointees. Horn said Koskinen was ``an excellent
choice'' because he was so non-partisan in his dealings with
Congress, which approved $8.5 billion for Y2K fixes.


Harris Miller, president of the Information Technology
Association of America, said the Y2K battle progressed more quickly
than many business people had expected because Koskinen, Horn and
several other members of Congress revealed themselves to be
``really good people'' who just wanted solutions.


``It was the luck of the draw,'' Miller said, but those who were
drawn to lead the Y2K battle turned in ``an amazing effort.''


Though Saturday revealed no significant Y2K problems, some
glitches were reported around the country. Among them:


_ The Pentagon said a U.S. military spying system was blinded
for about three hours because of a Y2K failure. A back-up system
partially restored operations while software patches were being
made.


_ An Amtrak computer that tracks trains failed temporarily in
Saturday's early hours, but operators quickly switched to a manual
system and fixed the software.


_ Computers at five nuclear plants across the country also
reported some temporary problems, but none were related to plant
operations or safety.


_ The U.S. Naval Observatory, which has a master clock in
Washington keeping the nation's official time, reported Saturday's
date as Jan. 1, 19100 on its Internet site. The glitch, which was
corrected, affected only the Web site, not the master clock.


_ Some 150 slot machines at three Delaware race tracks failed
briefly because of a Y2K bug.


(Marilyn Geewax can be reached by e-mail at:
mgeewax(at)coxnews.com)


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

