
Lakers Grow Up, Learn How to
Win _ that not even Phil Jackson is buying it until the postseason
begins. But in his first year with Shaquille O'Neal and Kobe
Bryant, Jackson has gotten the Lakers to buy into a defensive
philosophy that may pay huge dividends in a few months.


There is a reason the Lakers won their 10th straight game last
week, have won 17 of their last 18 and at 25-5 possess the best
record in the NBA. It is not the triangle offense as much as it is
a collapsing defense that has taken ammunition from some of the
league's top guns.


The Lakers are not as pretty but they are much more gritty.


``Phil has got us believing in helping each other out and
shutting teams down,'' O'Neal said. ``We're still unstoppable
sometimes on offense. But when we turn up the defensive intensity,
it's lights out, baby. People think we're just pretty boys out
here. We can get down and dirty, too. It just took a few years for
us realize our capabilities.''


The Lakers finished December with a 14-1 record. They have not
lost since Dec. 8 in Sacramento.


A Gun Without Bullets


In the wake of his firing last week, it is open for debate
whether P.J. Carlesimo had lost the respect of his players at
Golden State.


But one wonders if his tenure in the Bay Area would have been
different had the franchise made a concerted effort to draft and
build around Vince Carter instead of his North Carolina teammate,
Antawn Jamison, drafted one spot behind Carter. Or if the Warriors
had decided to send Latrell Sprewell to Miami for a legitimate
power forward, P.J. Brown, and a serviceable shooting guard, Dan
Majerle, instead of to the Knicks for John Starks, Chris Mills and
Terry Cummings.


``P.J. wasn't the problem as much as everyone thinks he was,''
said a recently released Warrior, who requested anonymity. ``We
didn't have any players. They still don't have any players.''


Around the League


As the year 2000 begins, it has come to this: Isaiah Rider says
he is sick and tired of teammates who don't care enough about
winning. Rider, a renowned malcontent, laced into teammates after a
loss to the Pacers on Wednesday, using an expletive-filled diatribe
to vent his frustration over the Hawks' being outscored by 40-10 in
the third quarter.


``People don't care, man,'' Rider said. ``I'm tired of this
laughing and giggling. We're losing. I care. I want to win.''


Rider entered the weekend averaging 23.0 points, good for 10th
in the league. He said those numbers mean little because of the
Hawks' 11-18 record.


He was so angry about the loss, he missed Atlanta's team flight
to Detroit on the same night, his third missed flight of the
season, and the Hawks suspended him for one game. ...


From the Future-Hall-of-Famers-Play-Hurt Dept.: John Stockton's
nose was broken in the closing minute of Monday night's 92-91
victory over the Phoenix Suns, when Jason Kidd struck him with an
elbow. Stockton, 37, was taken for X-rays to Lakeview Hospital in
Bountiful, Utah, where team doctors reset his nose. He played
Wednesday against Vancouver.

