
Airports around the world, ordinarily quiet on New Year's Eve,
were unusually so Friday as thousands of potential travelers stayed
put while the world's air traffic system rolled over to the year
2000.


Yet, despite such fears and recent concerns about terrorism,
commercial aviation entered the new year without incident as
midnight arrived around the globe.


The major test for commercial aviation came at midnight in
London when the global air traffic control system, which observes
Greenwich Mean Time, crossed over into the new year without
difficulty.


Worldwide, about 1,350 commercial jets were in the air at the
time, according to the Air Transport Association, the airline
industry's trade group. That was less than half the number of
planes that flew last New Year's Eve.


Airlines around the world canceled thousands of flights because
of low demand.


Eurocontrol, the organization that coordinates air traffic over
Europe, estimated that about 50 jets were in the air at midnight, 5
percent of the peak traffic on a typical winter day.


United Airlines and American Airlines, the world's two largest
carriers, said they had canceled about one-third of their flights
Friday.


As a result, airports across the United States appeared
desolate. The three New York airports _ Kennedy International,
LaGuardia and Newark _ were expecting to handle only 270,000
passengers Friday, compared with 430,000 on the same day last year.


Many airline executives and aviation officials around the world
had hoped to reassure the public by being passengers themselves on
New Year's Eve. Jane Garvey, chief of the Federal Aviation
Administration, booked herself on several flights that were
subsequently canceled.


Friday afternoon, flanked by the head of the FAA's Year 2000
effort, two public affairs officers, Sen. Slade Gorton of
Washington and a score of journalists, she boarded an American
Airlines flight from Washington to Dallas.


With 100 empty seats available on the jetliner, the only
passenger not directly connected to Ms. Garvey's efforts appeared
to be Janet S. Rhodes of Long Beach, Calif., who said she came to
Washington on Friday so that she could greet the new millennium
aloft and tell her grandchildren about it.


Ms. Rhodes said she had told her four sons, ``Just follow Jane
Garvey's progress on television and you'll know where I am.''


The world's airlines and air traffic control centers spent an
estimated $2.5 billion to assure that their computers could read
the year 2000 correctly. But experts did not consider air safety to
be particularly vulnerable.


The only glitch reported Fridayoccurred when printers in Alaska,
California and Long Island that are used to relay information to
control- lers from airplanes flying over the ocean all went on the
blink at mid- night Greenwich time. The failure lasted only about
30 minutes and had no operational effect, the FAA said, adding that
it was not even clear that the problem was caused by the date
change.


Boeing Co., the world's largest producer of commercial
airliners, said it surveyed thousands of airborne systems on its
planes and found only three that were date sensitive.


Nevertheless, many passengers said they were not taking any
chances by being in the air at the witching hour.


``I think it will probably be OK, but I'm trying to get home
before midnight,'' said Del Turner, who was waiting for a flight at
Los Angeles International Airport. ``Something will happen. They
haven't fixed everything.''

