
The mass murderer had spent much of the past
month hiding in a drainage culvert and later a cave. He looked
haggard. His clothes were dirty and wrinkled and wet. He was
holding two satchels, one filled with eggs, the other with apples.


He introduced himself. ``I am Javed Iqbal, killer of 100 boys,''
he told the receptionist in the lobby of the newspaper office.
``Please tell someone in the reporting section that I have come to
surrender.''


The receptionist recalls being unsure what to do. Was this
pathetic-looking man really Pakistan's most notorious killer? Or
merely some bothersome fool?


The hour was late, just after 9 p.m. Deadlines were pressing.
Ten minutes passed before a reporter was finally summoned, and he
was staggered at the scoop. He invited Iqbal, scourge of this
entire nation, upstairs for questioning.


And that is how it came to an end Thursday, the frantic
month-long hunt for a vengeance-seeking confessed killer, a man who
enticed young teens _ most of them beggars and runaways _ to his
tiny apartment in historic Lahore. He fed them and entertained them
and asked their life stories and took their snapshots. Then he
suffocated them, later dissolving their bodies in large vats of
acid. He poured the residue in an alleyway sewer.


Iqbal, 38, a wealthy, tormented man, kept an annotated list of
his deeds, with his victims' names and ages and the dates of their
deaths. He kept piles of clothing and shoes taken from his victims.
When, by his count, he had killed 100, he stopped.


``I could have killed 500, this was not a problem, money was not
a problem,'' he told reporters and editors in a small office as
they recorded his words. ``But the pledge I had taken was of 100
children, and I never wanted to violate this.''


The ``pledge,'' he said, was an act of revenge against the
police. He repeated a story that he had written in an earlier
confessional, of how two young servants had beaten him up badly
last year, of how the police had ignored his complaints and instead
accused him of sodomy, something he had been charged with before.


He decided that the killing of children would be his means of
retribution. ``In this way, I would take revenge from the world I
hated,'' he said of his 6-month homicidal binge. ``My mother cried
for me. I wanted 100 mothers to cry for their children.''


He succeeded.


Early in December, as news of the crimes became public, parents
lined up by the thousands to rummage through huge piles of rumpled
clothes and old shoes that had been found in Iqbal's apartment.
Some found items that belonged to their missing sons. Others merely
saw their children's photos spread across wobbly wooden tables at
the police station. Or they read the morbid details in Iqbal's
diaries. Parental grief became a daily spectacle as more and more
people complained: ``Why can't the police find the killer?''


Criticism of the police has been immense, with riots in Lahore.


In late November, Iqbal actually turned himself in to a
policeman who ignored his confession as a fantasy. The murderer
then sent his incriminating diary and photos to The Jang newspaper,
whose reporters, on Dec. 2, were the first to search his apartment
and find evidence of the crimes. By then, Iqbal was a fugitive,
though notes he left behind indicated that he intended to drown
himself.


He surrendered on Thursday at the three-story offices shared by
The Jang, an Urdu-language publication, and its sister paper, The
News, which is written in English.


At Iqbal's request, the army was called to take him into custody
rather than the police. At the time, the police announcing that
they had arrested two men suspected of being Iqbal's accomplices.
The two, Muhammad Shahzad and Muhammad Nadeem, were caught trying
to cash a traveler's check in Iqbal's name. They admitted that they
were helping the killer hide out in the culvert and the cave,
police said.


Iqbal, who lived off the funds from the sale of a family
business, contends that he was helped in the slayings by various
confederates, including one who has already died in police custody.
Thursday, Iqbal said that many of the victims were made to inhale a
mixture of cyanide and acid as they slept.


``I myself wore a mask, and after about five breaths, the
sleeping victim would be dead,'' he said. ``Then my friends would
place the body in a container and later drain it away.''


According to The Jang and The News, Iqbal was unrepentant as he
told his story. He was calm as he was led away. ``I am a relieved
man today,'' he said, even as he acknowledged that his fate is
likely to be the gallows.


He reflected on his actions as heroic, something in the
long-term public interest. He remarked how easy it was to dispose
of the bodies of his victims in the large vats of acid. Such easily
abused chemicals are a great danger to society, Iqbal said.


``What if terrorists learned of these things,'' the mass
murderer fretted.

