
Even as Indians breathed a collective sigh of relief
Saturday at the peaceful resolution of the hijacking crisis,
celebrations were dampened by the realization that the weeklong
standoff had ended in a victory for terrorism.


``The nation has won the battle but lost the war,'' said V.R.
Mehta, vice chancellor of Delhi University and a specialist in
international affairs. He argued that the Indian government had
paid a dangerously high price for the release of the 155 passengers
and crew aboard the hijacked Indian Airlines plane.


The government freed three jailed Islamic militants Friday to
secure the release of the hostages, who had endured extreme cold
and death threats from their captors throughout the harrowing
weeklong ordeal. It was India's 13th hijacking in 20 years, but the
first in which the government gave in to the hostage-takers'
demands.


``The deal that the government was finally forced to agree to .
. . is certainly a bitter pill for the country to swallow,'' The
Hindu newspaper wrote in a front-page editorial Saturday. The Times
of India was equally pessimistic, declaring, ``No amount of
verbiage or dissimulation can convert this setback into a victory
for the Indian nation.''


The papers expressed the widespread view that the bargain struck
by the government, however unavoidable, would set a dangerous
precedent for other would-be hijackers _ particularly Islamic
militants fighting for the secession of the northern Indian state
of Jammu and Kashmir. The 53-year dispute over India's only
Muslim-majority state has sparked two wars between India and Muslim
Pakistan and become a cause celebre of Islamic fundamentalists
worldwide.


The five hijackers and at least one of the freed militants were
believed to be members of the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, one of a dozen
Islamic groups waging a 10-year-old insurgency in Kashmir. The
group is named on the US list of terrorist organizations for its
role in the spate of kidnappings and bomb attacks in India over the
past decade.


Despite the politically savvy timing of enabling the hostages to
return home New Year's Eve, the deal cut for their release was
expected to have lasting repercussions for the government. The
Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party, which leads the governing
coalition, rode to a second term in office in October on the heels
of its success in routing out hundreds of Islamic infiltrators in
Kashmir last summer, as well as conducting India's first successful
nuclear tests in May 1998.


``One of the calling cards of the BJP was its supposed great
nationalistic outlook and its firm stand on national security,''
said Bharat Karnad, a defense specialist with the Center for Policy
Studies in New Delhi. ``That's precisely what is being eroded at
the edges at the moment and . . . it's going to get at their
reputation and standing amongst the people.''


However, others said many Indians recognized that the government
had found itself in a no-win situation. ``I'm sure people realize
that given the situation, there was no way out,'' said Mehta. He
blamed the international community for not coming out strongly
enough in condemning the hijackers.


The primary criticism of the government was that it had failed
to prevent the hijacked plane from leaving Indian territory _ a
critical lapse that curtailed its negotiating power with the
hijackers. The plane had stopped for 40 minutes in the western city
of Amritsar for refueling. But a series of communications failures
_ including the fact that the prime minister was not even alerted
of the crisis until 45 minutes later _ enabled the hijackers to
ensure that the plane reached friendlier ground in Islamic
Afghanistan.


Opposition parties, which had professed support for the
government during the negotiation period, sought Saturday to
capitalize on the concessions made to the terrorists. ``This will
have far-reaching implications for this government,'' said Anil
Durrani, spokesman for the main opposition Congress party. He said
Congress governments, which have governed India for most of its 53
years of independence, ``chose to sacrifice rather than give up
terrorists.''


The party is expected to highlight the contrast between the
current government's response and that of former prime minister
Indira Gandhi, whose hard-line stand against Sikh separatists in
the northern state of Punjab cost her her life. Gandhi deployed
Indian soldiers in 1984 to flush out militants from their hideout
inside Sikhdom's most important shrine, the Golden Temple. The
offensive, known as Operation Bluestar, led to her assassination at
the hands of her Sikh bodyguards several months later.


Government officials sought to deflect criticism by drawing a
different comparison between this week's hostage crisis and another
in 1989. The government at the time, led by the populist People's
Party, traded 30 jailed militants for the release of one kidnapping
victim _ who happened to be the daughter of the powerful home
minister.


But Karnad said such comparisons were meaningless in terms of
the broader impact of the hostage swap. ``It's a moot point, the
mathematics of the deal, because it undermines the basic principle
of dealing with terrorists,'' he said, ``that you don't bargain
with hostages because you become vulnerable.''


The decision to release the militants from Indian jails also
sparked heavy criticism from the military. The army suffered heavy
casualties in last summer's operation to flush out hundreds of
Pakistani-backed militants from Kashmir, which has been the cause
of two of the three wars between India and Pakistan.


``The act of the government is a shot in the arm for the
terrorists,'' a senior army official was quoted as saying in the
Indian Express newspaper. ``The sacrifices made by the police and
the soldiers have come to naught.''

