
Motivation was never an issue. To keep focused on
rehabilitating a stress fracture in his right foot, Danny Fortson
did not have to leave his living room. A dose of NBA highlights on
``SportsCenter'' was enough to speed the healing process. When the
video clips featured a win by his former team, the Denver Nuggets,
it was tough to sit still.


Fortson remained on the injured list for the Celtics' first
meeting with the Nuggets. Before the rematch last Thursday, he
could barely contain his excitement. He relished the opportunity to
play the third game of his season in Denver. The power forward
spoke more like the professional boxers he so admires when he
predicted a Boston victory.


But most evident in Fortson's return to the Mile High City was
emotion. He prides himself on the energy he can bring to his new
team, hoping the Celtics will feed off his physical play. Denver
brought out Fortson's passion which lay dormant through 25 games of
inactivity and the first two games of his comeback. In the city he
used to call home, Fortson pushed himself for the first time since
returning to action. The game offered Fortson a true test of where
he stands.


``I needed a game like this with a lot of emotion so I could
push the limits,'' said Fortson. ``I needed a game like this to get
myself together because I haven't felt that type of emotion in
awhile. It was very important.


``I'm just going to get better and better each game. I should.
I'm just staying positive. I love to play basketball. I hate to sit
and watch, but I understand the situation so I just have to wait
until my time comes and I'm able to play a certain amount of
minutes without getting tired.''


Fortson checked in against the Nuggets in the second quarter,
leaping above the rim to grab a defensive rebound and then
extending the Celtics' lead with a leaning layup. Although known
more for his rebounding skills than his scoring, the power forward
led the Celtics with 6 points in the quarter to go with four
rebounds in seven minutes. He would go on to collect another basket
and two more boards. But it was his performance in the second
quarter, before a lack of conditioning started to show, that
provided a glimpse of the future.


``I think per minute played, I think he's going to be one of the
best rebounders in the game,'' said coach Rick Pitino.


Afterward, Fortson called the outing the best of his three-game
Boston career. He was not talking about statistics, although he had
just one rebound and no points against the Clippers and 9 points
and five rebounds playing the Kings. Before undergoing surgery for
the stress fracture in late October, Fortson led the Celtics with
11.5 rebounds in two preseason games. Still, the forward claimed
that against Denver he felt more comfortable on the court than he
has in a long time.


``I came out and played hard,'' he said. ``I just feel good.''


The 6-foot-7-inch rebounder hopes to improve by leaps and
bounds. In addition to getting into better shape and gaining a
better feel for the flow of the Celtics' games, he must continue to
familiarize himself with new plays. Two months of watching Boston
play and practice was helpful, but time on the sidelines did not
make Fortson's adjustment to his new team easier.


``Sometimes I got a little confused now and then with the plays,
but that's going to come,'' said Fortson after the 102-94 verdict
in Denver. ``I thought I did a pretty good job in the first half.''


And Fortson will not shy away from hard work. Known for being
the last man off the practice court when he played for the Nuggets,
the injury made Fortson change his approach to practice, but did
not diminish his work ethic. He now prefers to arrive early to
workouts, rather than continue pounding his right foot after an
exhausting session under Pitino.


Fortson called coming back from surgery ``the toughest thing I
ever had to do'' and the 8 pounds he lost during his rehabilitation
support his claim.


``It's not an easy road,'' said Fortson of his late start with
Boston, ``but you've got to play with the cards you've been
dealt.''

