
Huge Storm Damage in France


Back-to-back storms with gale force winds that reached 120 miles
per hour ripped through France and other parts of Europe. The
French Ministry of Culture and Communication said it would take
more than $60 million just to repair damage to historic monuments
like Notre Dame Cathedral, Ste.-Chapelle and the palace at
Versailles.


The storms tore off roofs, toppled thousands of trees and caused
flooding and avalanches that killed at least 130 people throughout
Europe, 78 of them in France. More than a quarter of Frances
electric grid was damaged. One insurance company said the cost of
repairing damages from the storms would reach $5 billion.


_ SUZANNE DALEY


A Coup in Ivory Coast


Ever since it achieved independence from France in 1960, Ivory
Coast has been considered a model of stability and prosperity in
Africa. So it came as a shock, both in Africa and in France, when
soldiers mutinying over low pay went on a looting spree and, one
day later, a military junta announced a coup, the first in the
country's history.


The leader of the nonviolent coup, Gen. Robert Guei, a former
armed forces chief ousted by President Henri Konan Bedie, said he
took action largely because Bedie was creating ethnic divisions.


_ DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.


Big Recall of Luxury Foods


In what may be the first Internet recall of contaminated food,
D'Artagnan, the Newark, N.J., company known nationwide for its high
quality foods, went beyond notifying the usual retailers and
distributors of its voluntary recall of all of the pates, mousses
and terrines made at a Huntington, N.Y., plant.


The company called every customer who had ordered the products
over the Internet and through its catalog _ a total of 3,576 calls.


The products were recalled because a few of the company's
truffled mousses and peppercorn mousses were found to be
contaminated with listeria, a potentially deadly bacterium.


_ MARIAN BURROS


Bail Is Denied For Los Alamos Scientist


On the surface, the hearings in the case of Dr. Wen Ho Lee, the
scientist accused of mishandling sensitive nuclear secrets at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory, were simple. Lee sought to be
released on bail.


He was refused bail a second time, but not before the hearing
was turned into a mini-trial of both Lee and the security at
government weapons labs.


Prosecutors called Lee devious in his efforts to bypass security
precautions.


The defense, however, showed that Lee had downloaded the secret
data easily onto computer tapes, had left evidence in the open and
had even called the lab to ask how to delete some files. The last
was an act that prosecutors called especially nefarious.


_ JAMES STERNGOLD


Giuliani Sees Welfare Victory


New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani has declared victory in his
war on welfare. The mayor, a likely Senate candidate, said he had
met the deadline he set 18 months ago to end welfare by
``engaging'' all available adult recipients in work or
work-preparation in exchange for aid.


But critics loudly disputed his figures, noting for example that
recipients counted as successes included thousands merely referred
for evaluation for work.


_ NINA BERNSTEIN

