
New Year's Day 2000 held good news and bad news for
the Holy Land. The evening before had passed with few technological
glitches or security threats, but there was no apparent arrival of
the Messiah, either.


Neither Israel nor the Palestinian-controlled areas reported any
problems with basic services on Saturday. While air traffic had
been called off overnight, the first flight left Israel's Ben
Gurion International Airport for Zurich without incident Saturday
morning.


Most businesses were closed. Banks, as a precaution, were not
scheduled to open until Monday, a day later than usual. But many
Palestinians, who follow a Muslim work week, were back on the job
without major problems. Israelis begin their week Sunday.


On the spiritual front, a small minority of believers sees the
start of 2000 as kicking off the process of Christ's return.


Though most do not set a specific date, the New Testament states
that he will return on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem and walk
through the sealed Golden Gate into the walled Old City quarter.


But the Mount of Olives was unchanged Saturday _ a dusty
Palestinian neighborhood where taxis and tour busses jam up traffic
on the pocked roads.


``This is the anti-climax,'' said Palestinian Ibrahim Dawud,
owner of the Mount of Olives Hotel. ``We're reverting back into
insignificance.''


The hotel is adjacent to the Chapel of the Ascension, where
Christ is believed to have ascended to heaven and is expected to
return. With 60 rooms, the hotel had several pilgrims and dozens of
media guests the night before but was nearly empty Saturday.


``I prefer an anti-climax to an anti-Christ,'' joked Dawud,
referring to the villain many of his guests believe will play out
the end of the world in a duel with God.


Most believers in Christ's return do not try to put a specific
date on his arrival. Only two people _ one on the Mount of Olives
and one near the Golden Gate _ were detained by Israeli police
Friday night for religiously-inspired rantings. Authorities had
feared suicides or attacks on the Temple Mount area behind the
Golden Gate, but there were none.


There were clearly fewer police than their record numbers of the
night before, though paramilitary units were still stationed on the
mount and an Israeli soldier could be seen reclining on the wall
above the Golden Gate.


Two digital cameras still transmitted continuous views of the
two sites to the Internet Web site known as MessiahCAM at
www.olivetree.org. The founders of the site, Peter and Christine
Darg of Virginia, see the year 2000 as a time to focus on
spirituality _ not the literal date of Christ's return.


There were minor Y2K-related glitches in Palestinian-controlled
Bethlehem, the place of Christ's birth at the center of the
millennium anniversary.


The large countdown-clock towering over Manger Square, a
donation from the city of Athens, Greece, appeared to break down at
midnight on New Year's Eve. Saturday it was clicking the minutes
off like seconds. And, many of the 2,000 doves released at 12:01
a.m. Saturday were panicked by simultaneous fireworks. Loose
feathers were scattered along the stones of the square.


But the Bethlehem post office was running without problems and
tourists were pleased with the smooth first day of the year.


``This is the place to be. It brings our faith to life,'' said
Sue Reimer, 65, a teacher from Beaumont, Texas. As she left the
Church of the Nativity she summed up the night: ``So many newsmen,
so little news.''


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

