
Two thousand years after Christ's obscure birth in a dusty town
in Judea, the world's 6 billion people _ most of them non-Christian
and many of them preoccupied with terrorism, computers, diets, bank
accounts, politics and the perils of the future _ rode their
turning blue planet across time's invisible line Friday and, by
common consent, looked into the dawn of a new millennium.


What they saw first was a party. It was garish, glittering and
global, and millions, setting religious considerations and personal
concerns aside, joined in the festivities to celebrate the
conjunction of a new year, a new century and a new thousand-year
cycle of history. They also put aside the inconvenient fact that
the millennium, technically, is still a year off.


It hardly mattered. In New York's Times Square and across the
United States, in Europe, Asia, Africa and Australia, in cities and
towns all over the world, bells pealed, crowds shrieked and surged,
skyrockets soared into the night, fireworks burst into supernovas,
``Auld Lang Syne'' rang out, lights pulsed, loved ones and friends
embraced, and the music and Champagne flowed.


On a day when moods ran the spectrum from tensions and prayers
to euphoria and irresistible hyperbole, what most were calling
Christianity's Third Millennium arrived in 24 stages as the earth
revolved through the time zones and midnight elapsed again and
again in an around-the-clock, around-the-world series of golden
moments that began at the International Dateline in the Pacific and
raced westward across Asia, Africa, Europe and the Americas.


In New York, a vast crowd of revelers _ the guesses ran as high
2 million _ packed Times Square and much of Midtown Manhattan for
the biggest public event ever held in the city _ a 26-hour, $7
million marathon of music, fireworks, confetti and deafening voices
culminating as a 1,070-pound crystal ball descended at midnight,
while the police sweated out an enormous potential for trouble.


And there were lavish celebrations in Washington, London, Paris,
Rome, Berlin, Jerusalem, Moscow, Cape Town, New Delhi, Shanghai,
Beijing, Tokyo, Mexico City, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires and
hundreds of other cities. There were parties, concerts, dances,
torchlight parades and televised extravaganzas that brought the
worldwide show to billions more at home and to the crowds in Times
Square over giant video screens _ a case of celebrators watching
celebrators.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


To a Martian earthwatcher (tuning in with delicate ear and
Cycloptic eye), it might have appeared that the inhabitants of the
third world from the Sun had suddenly lost their senses or gone to
war again. But it was only humanity on the threshold of a new age,
exercising its primal urge to celebrate.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


There had been an avalanche of happy millennial overkill in
recent days _ claims of the last-game, last-meal, first-baby kind _
and Friday it was the turn of world leaders in government,
religion, science and other fields, who spoke of the millennium's
meaning in more serious tones.


``Today, we celebrate more than the changing of the calendar,''
President Clinton, extending millennium greetings to the world,
said in an address to diplomats and children from 100 nations. ``We
celebrate the opportunity we have to make this a true changing of
the times, a gateway to greater peace and freedom, to prosperity
and harmony.''


In Moscow, Boris Yeltsin, who has been plagued with heart and
other problems for most of his eight years as Russia's president,
unexpectedly announced his resignation. ``Russia must enter the new
millennium with new politicians, new faces, new intelligent, strong
and energetic people,'' he said. ``And we who have been in power
for many years must go.''


At the Vatican, Pope John Paul II, fulfilling his dream to lead
the Roman Catholic Church across the threshold of 2000, gave his
blessing to a vast crowd in St. Peter's Square, reiterated his
calls for an end to war and poverty, and thanked God for ``the
events of this year, this century and this millennium.''


There were millions around the world who had no reason to be
festive, people like Tom Nganga, 40, who lives in Kangemi, a vast
slum of Nairobi, Kenya. ``We as Kenyans and people of Kangemi are
very, very angry as we celebrate this millennium,'' he said.
``People are very poor. People have nothing to eat. We have nothing
to celebrate.''


While the millennium celebrations drew millions, there were
relatively few casualties. In the Philippines, two people were
killed by stray gunfire and a 5-year-old boy died after a
firecracker exploded in his face. At least 200 other Filipinos were
injured by fireworks. In Paris, 70 people were hurt in crowds.


After years of concern over Y2K computer problems that had cost
billions of dollars to fix, there were no immediate reports of
computer-related disasters anywhere in the world _ no plane
crashes, major power failures, nuclear plant shutdowns or collapses
of banking, business, government or health care systems.


But elevators, intercity trains and subways in many American
cities and in other countries as well were halted briefly over the
witching hour, and some airlines canceled flights for the day, just
to be safe. Many airports were all but deserted, with wary
travelers staying put. Experts said it might take days for some
computer problems to develop, in part because many businesses and
government agencies were closed for the holiday weekend.


There had also been fears that terrorists, publicity seekers or
the insane might set off explosions or mount chemical or biological
attacks as millions gathered to celebrate, while vast audiences
watched on television. No specific threats had been reported,
although some suspects had been seized recently. Still, there were
no immediate reports of trouble, and law enforcement authorities
seemed ready for almost anything.


(MORE)


nn

