
As the world glided smoothly into the new century,
the United States reported Saturday only a smattering of minor Y2K
glitches, but officials cautioned that problems could still crop
up, especially starting Monday.


John Koskinen, chief of the White House's Y2K command center,
said Monday will be a crucial milestone because it will be the
first day of normal business operations following the long holiday
weekend.


Otherwise, he offered generally upbeat news about the nation's
progress. ``We have not been able to find anything of great
significance to report,'' he said.


All of the nation's major sectors from airlines to electric
power grids to telecommunications continued working without
incident on the first day of the new century, he said.


The Pentagon reported Saturday that a satellite intelligence
defense system had failed shortly after 7 p.m. EST Friday when the
clock in that system turned past midnight Greenwich Mean Time.


John Hamre, Deputy Defense Secretary, said that a backup system
is currently in place and that the problem was with a ground-based
computer used to process information from the satellite. He said it
was shutdown for a little more than two hours but declined to
identify its mission or where the ground-based satellite was
located.


Other reported Y2K glitches were quickly fixed. Koskinen said an
Amtrak computer system used to track trains went down temporarily
early Saturday but that train officials switched to a manual system
and then fixed the computer.


The U.S. Naval Observatory, which has a master clock in
Washington that serves as the nation's official source of time,
reported the date as Jan. 1, 19100 during the earliest hours of the
new year on its Internet site. The glitch has since been corrected
and was only on that Web site. It was not a problem in the master
clock, Koskinen said.


He said federal government agencies and private industry would
continue testing their systems and report any glitches, whether
Y2K-related or not. He said checks of federal government buildings
showed temporary problems with alarm systems at U.S. facilities in
Boston, Kansas City and Omaha.


A Federal Aviation Administration system used to notify pilots
about such things as weather via e-mail shut down Saturday, but
Koskinen said it was unclear whether the problem was Y2K-related. A
backup pilot notification system was put in place, and air traffic
safety was not affected, he added.


As a precaution, the Social Security Administration,
headquartered in Baltimore, switched to backup generators before
the millenium rollover. The agency switched its systems back to
Baltimore's main power grid at 6 a.m. EST Saturday without
incident. Koskinen said all of Social Security's computers in
Baltimore and at its field offices across the country are working
normally.


Some other federal agencies, also as a precaution, temporarily
shut down their Internet Web sites.


He said the federal Y2K web site recorded 3 million hits on
Friday, compared to 700,000 on Thursday.


Internet functions were unaffected, he said.


On the energy front, eight of the more than 3,200 utilities in
the nation reported Y2K problems with their clocks used to
synchronize operations. Seven of the 103 nuclear power plants
reported `minor Y2K related issues,'' he said.


None of the nuclear or non-nuclear plants experienced any
operational problem as a result, according to Koskinen.


In transportation, there were small glitches, he said, all of
them minor.


The National Retail Federation reported retailers were
functioning normally Saturday.


Kathy Hopka, a Y2K spokeswoman for the retailers, said a 1997
survey showed that if big retailers had done nothing to prepare for
Y2K, `they wouldn't have opened this morning.''


For the most part, Koskinen and other top government officials
gave upbeat reports for the second day in a row as the new year
swept across the globe.


On Friday, countries such as China, Russia and Ukraine, which
preceded the United States into the new year, rolled into Jan. 1
without problems in their nuclear power plants and other key
systems that American officials had feared might shut down as a
result of a Y2K computer glitch. More significantly, those systems
continued operating in those countries on their second day of the
New Year.


The biggest reported Y2K problem overseas occurred when Japan's
Shika Nuclear Power Station about 170 miles northwest of Tokyo lost
its radiation alarm system shortly after midnight there. Energy
Secretary Bill Richardson described it as a backup system and said
it did not affect plant safety.


The United States passed its first Y2K tests at 7 p.m. EST
Friday, when computers that control airline traffic, about a third
of the nation's power grid and military operations appeared to roll
over into the new year without incident. The


computers are based on Greenwich Mean Time, which is five hours
ahead of the Eastern Standard Time zone.


``The nation's airspace system is up and running safely,''
Federal Aviation Administration chief Jane Garvey said Friday
night. She flew on a jet from Washington, D.C., to Dallas when air
traffic computers passed midnight GMT.


Koskinen, who had predicted an easy transition into the new
year, said the fact that it happened should not lead to anyone to
``underestimate the nature of the problem that was originally
there.


``Had the effort not been made, had the money not been spent, we
would be in a very different situation than we find ourselves in
right now,'' he said.


The Commerce Department estimates that some $100 billion was
spent in the United States over the past five years to fix the Y2K
problem _ which would occur if computers interpreted the digits 00
as 1900 rather than 2000. Worldwide is it estimated that
governments and private industry spent close to $400 billion fixing


their computers.

