
The eastern half of the United States smoothly
followed the rest of the world into the new century early Saturday
with only a smattering of minor Y2K glitches reported.


Slot machines in Delaware went bonkers and clocks at a Wisconsin
electricity plant went haywire, as if to highlight the lack of
serious problems in the nation.


``We have seen no indications of any significant Y2K problems,''
said John Koskinen, chief of the White House's Y2K command center,
based on reports from the Eastern and Central time zones.


He reported some congestion on telephone networks on the East
Coast as the clock moved past midnight. ``Some people have received
messages that all circuits are busy,'' he said, referring to the
`Mother's Day effect'' of heavy telephone use.


Earlier Friday, Koskinen reported that about 150 slot machines
at three Delaware race tracks temporarily shut down Thursday night
after the slots' time-based computer chips _ programmed to read
three days ahead _ became confused when they rolled over to 2000.
The slots were quickly repaired. In Wisconsin the clocks _ which
went down Friday at 7 p.m. EST _ were quickly reset and no one lost
power.


Koskinen and a host of other top government officials gave
upbeat reports all day Friday and early Saturday as the new year
swept across most of the globe.


On Friday, Asia, Russia and Europe preceded the United States
into the new century. Countries such as China, Russia and Ukraine
rolled into Jan. 1 without problems in their nuclear power plants
and other key systems that U.S. officials had feared might shut
down as a result of a Y2K computer glitch. Officials cautioned,
however, that problems could still crop up in coming days. Monday
was cited as a crucial milestone because it will be the first day
of normal business operations following the long holiday weekend.


The biggest reported Y2K problem overseas was with a Japanese
nuclear plant. The Shika Nuclear Power Station about 170 miles
northwest of Tokyo, lost its radiation alarm system shortly after
midnight there. Energy Secretary Bill Richardson described the
system as a backup system and said it did not affect plant safety.


The United States experienced its first Y2K tests at 7 p.m. EST
Friday, when computers that control airline traffic, about
one-third of the nation's power grid and military operations
appeared to roll over into the new year without incident. The
computers are based on Greenwich Mean Time, which is five hours
ahead of the Eastern Standard Time zone.


``The nation's airspace system is up and running safely,''
Federal Aviation Administration chief Jane Garvey said. She was
aboard a jet traveling from Washington, D.C., to Dallas when air
traffic computers passed midnight GMT.


Even before parts of the U.S. crossed into the new millenium,
Koskinen predicted the country would easily weather the transition
into the New Year.


``I have never felt that there was any significant chance that
the United States would have would have a major problem in the
infrastructure, either nationally or regionally,'' he said.


But, he said, the fact that virtually all of the world moved
into the new year without any problems should not lead to anyone to
`underestimate the nature of the problem that was originally
there.''


`Had the effort not been made, had the money not been spent, we
would be in a very different situation than we find ourselves in
right now,'' he said.


The Commerce Department estimates that some $100 billion was
spent in the United States over the past five years to fix the Y2K
problem _ which would occur if computers interpreted the digits
``00'' as 1900 rather than 2000. Worldwide is it estimated that
governments and private industry spent close to $400 billion fixing
its computers.


Early good news came to the White House center as New Year's eve
slipped past midnight in Western Pacific time zones first. For
example, New Zealand celebrated the arrival of the New Year 18
hours before Washington, D.C. As Japan, Australia and other nations
joined the '00 honor roll, optimism grew at the White House Y2K
coordination center that years of preparedness were paying off.


Thomas Pickering, the No. 2 person at the State Department,
reported that all 29 of Russia's nuclear power plants passed into
the new year without incident, a reassuring note because of concern
about Russia's attention to the Y2K issue and its aging nuclear
reactors.

The Seattle Post-Intelligencer plans to move the following
stories for clients of the NYTimes News Service for editions of
Friday, Dec. 31, and thereafter. If you have any questions, please
call Bob Schenet on the national-foreign desk at (206) 448-8037.
	BOMB-SUSPECTS (Seattle) _ The Algerian arrested two weeks ago in
Washington after he ran from customs inspectors and from his car
loaded with high explosives belongs to a notorious terrorist group
blamed for massacres, bombings and a hijacking, federal prosecutors
now assert. And prosecutors have linked Ahmed Ressam, who remains
in a federal dentention center south of Seattle, with a Canadian
woman arrested after she tried to cross the U.S. border at a remote
port of entry in Vermont.
	By Scott Sunde. (Story will move in the ``a'' category.)
	MILLENNIUM-TIME (Undated) _ On the eve of a new millennium _ or
not _ it's worth remembering what Albert Einstein told us. Time is
relative. For computers and other number-driven devices, the
numerical millennium does begin precisely when the digits click
over to that first microsecond or nanosecond or eensy-teeny-weenier
second that will mark the first Y2K moment, Jan. 1, 2000.
	Outside of cyberspace, however, our millennial celebrations will
have to tolerate a very unscientific and much lower level of
precision.
	By Tom Paulson. (Story has moved in the ``l'' category.)
