
Despite the beluga and the rack of lamb, Elizabeth
Taylor in a pink boa and Lara Flynn Boyle nuzzling Jack Nicholson
at a table near the back of the East Room, the White House
Millennium supper seemed oddly like a business dinner.


As arriving guests _ some 360 artists, scientists and
fund-raisers, along with major donors, loyal senators and favorite
employees _ filed past reporters in the entryway of the White
House, more than a few took the opportunity to plug some project or
product.


``I'm celebrating the 21st century in telecommunications
infrastructure,'' said one sentimentalist. Terry McAuliffe crowed
about raising $16 million to pay for the millennial extravaganza,
and Mary Tyler Moore noted that she was celebrating her ABC movie
``Mary and Rhoda,'' scheduled for Feb. 7: ``I've just seen the
rough cut and I'm very proud.'' Mary Wilson announced a reunion of
the Supremes.


Others said outright that they felt they had gotten their
money's worth in return for major donations to pay for the
festivities. And at the dinner itself, executives seated near
Commerce Secretary William Daley were openly lobbying him on behalf
of their businesses.


There was a conspicuous lack of flashy jewelry on display, and
as many women in low-key velvet pants and tunics as in taffeta
gowns. Some, presumably, were dressing to accommodate the silk long
johns recommended by the White House for keeping warm while
watching the show on the Mall later in the evening.


Still, a few guests were sparkling, and the hostess was, too:
Hillary Rodham Clinton's black silk dress was offset by a collar of
glittering stones. And when a rather baldly appreciative reporter
asked Sophia Loren whether she would be able to keep warm in her
low-cut black dress, she said, ``I have a little wrap,'' and seemed
to gesture toward the diamonds and rubies around her neck.


The president began the dinner with a toast, and on the last New
Year's of the century, Clinton asked his guests, who were packed
Paris-bistro-close in both the East Room and the State Dining Room,
to make a wish, and said he would do likewise. He kept his own
hopes to himself, but spoke of a better future that ``I hope every
American will take a moment to imagine on this Millennium Eve.''


Then, joking that he could hardly be expected to recap the last
1,000 years when ``in the State of the Union I get a whole hour to
talk about a single year and usually I run over,'' he asked the
crowd to join him in a three-part toast to themselves, to Mrs.
Clinton, and to the future itself.


(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


Guests included the Nobel prize-winning scientist Murray
Gell-Mann, who gamely tried out some jokes on Sid Caesar, and
Muhammad Ali, who got a bear hug from the president. Walter Kaye,
the political supporter responsible for first bringing Monica
Lewinsky to the White House, was also on the guest list.


Sen. Edward M. Kennedy, D-Mass., accompanied by his wife,
Victoria Reggie Kennedy, and his sister, Jean Kennedy Smith, a
former ambassador to Ireland, came in shouting, ``See my pretty
sister the ambassador?'' Lynda Johnson Robb said her red brocade
jacket had begun life as a smoking jacket worn by her father,
President Lyndon B. Johnson.


The contingent of actors included Ossie Davis, Julie Harris and
Robert DeNiro, who raced past reporters as they argued over whether
Nicholson had just said he was glad to be there because ``this is
America here,'' or ``this is America, dear.''


Ms. Taylor arrived about an hour late after being ``either
caught in traffic or lost,'' a White House spokeswoman said.
Wearing a deep-red velvet gown, she laughed with gusto as she was
led toward the East Room, stepping haltingly while an assistant
followed behind her pushing a wheelchair. Chelsea Clinton, who was
dressed in midnight blue, joined her parents in the receiving line,
the first time she had taken on such official host duties.


After dinner _ tastes of caviar, foie gras and oyster veloute
and a main course of rack of lamb served with roasted artichoke and
pepper ragout, followed by a green salad and chocolate and
champagne dessert _ guests were bused to the Mall.


The show at the foot of the Lincoln Memorial was nothing if not
eclectic, from Tom Jones singing ``It's Not Unusual,'' to Bobby
McFerrin, Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle performing ``He's Got
the Whole World in His Hands.''

