
A cottage industry of plain-language consultants has sprung up
in recent years. They aim to wage war on the business buzzwords,
governmental verbosity and turgid legalese that make many public
documents impossible to understand.


These experts also seek to instill some of the basics of good
writing, like the importance of short, direct sentences. Much of
their work has come in the mutual fund industry, which for the past
two years has been under an order by the Securities and Exchange
Commission to simplify documents.


Samples of the consultants' work follow.


_ DAVID LEONHARDT


_ Getting off to a good start is crucial. A convoluted
beginning, particularly when the subject matter is complicated, can
turn off readers in a hurry. Look at the difference between a 1998
mutual fund brochure from American Century Investments and one it
sent last year.


Before: All of the funds offered in this Prospectus seek capital
growth by investing in securities, primarily common stocks, that
meet certain fundamental and technical standards of selection
(relating primarily to earnings and revenue acceleration) and have,
in the opinion of the funds manager, better-than-average potential
for appreciation.


After: The fund managers look for stocks of companies that they
believe will increase in value over time, using a growth investment
strategy developed by American Century.


_ The SEC urges companies to use personal pronouns and simple
language. The Commission offered the following example in a 1998
plain-English handbook it sent to mutual fund companies.


Before: This Summary does not purport to be complete and is
qualified in its entirety by the more detailed information
contained in the Proxy Statement and the Appendices hereto, all of
which should be carefully reviewed.


After: Because this is a summary, it does not contain all the
information that may be important to you. You should read the
entire proxy statement and its appendices carefully before you
decide how to vote.


_ Plain-language doctors like those at the New York consulting
firm Siegel &AMP; Gale often start by making passive verbs active and
stamping out bureaucratese.


Before: Deposits may be made by a minor and withdrawals thereof
may be made by the minor without the consent of a parent of
guardian, neither of whom, in that capacity, shall have any right
to attach or interfere in any manner with such deposits or
withdrawals.


After: Minors may make deposits and withdrawals from their
accounts without the consent or interference of a parent or
guardian.


_ William M. Lutz, an English professor at Rutgers University
and a leading plain-language advocate, offers this example of how
to make a document easier to read.


Before: Marketing is a creative, analytic and integrative
effort. We need to work hand-in-hand with the field to get their
perspective and to draw on their experiences. And there are plenty
of ideas around the rest of the company, too. Marketing will draw
on your cumulative ideas and experiences and integrate them with
other business parts into a synergistic whole, which is bigger than
the sum of its parts.


After: To do marketing well, we'll have to draw on the ideas and
experiences from the field and other departments, determine how
these might help us, then integrate them into our marketing plans
and practices in a way that increases their effectiveness.


_ Sounds easy, right? But simplifying a document often requires
a whole new approach, not just slicing and dicing. Contrast the
first sentence of a letter that Texaco's chief executive, Peter I.
Bijur, wrote to shareholders in 1996 and the start to his letter in
1998, when the company began using simpler language:


Before: With this, my first report to you as Chairman and Chief
Executive Officer of Texaco, I am privileged to review along with
Vice Chairman Allen Krowe our strong 1996 performance, highlight
our greater ambitions and plan for 1997 and beyond, and discuss our
philosophy for sustaining long-term growth for our company.


After: 1998 was the toughest time we have faced in my 33 years
with the company.


(MORE)


nn

