
Among the more persistent fables in the West is that
the pork in seedy Chinese restaurants may actually be the meat of
stray cats.


But some Chinese pay good money to eat cat, in a Cantonese dish
called Dragon and Tiger Fight that combines the meat of snakes and
cats.


In the homeland of Cantonese food, the southern province of
Guangdong _ where it is said that people will eat anything with
four legs except the table _cat is neither a major item on menus
nor a traditional favorite. But a small minority of diners like to
order it, and they carry their preferences with them.


So along with the spread of Cantonese-style restaurants in
Beijing in the last few years has come a new problem: cat-nabbing,
to supply meat for demanding customers.


Just since September, as many as 500 Beijing families have had
their pet cats stolen, said Lu Di, an elderly Beijing woman who is
a longtime campaigner for animal welfare, a rarity here. There is
no way to confirm her estimate, which she extrapolated from the
many complaints that her Association for the Protection of Small
Animals has heard from anguished cat owners.


``We must take concrete measures to stop this barbarian
behavior,'' said Ms. Lu, who is also a professor of classical
literature at People's University. Her expanding national
association _ which claims a membership of 5,000, including pet
lovers, veterinarians and scientists _ is demanding that the police
take stronger measures to combat the theft of cats and has issued
public warnings to pet owners to beware.


``It's a pity that our government hasn't taken any action to
stop this,'' she said in an interview. While theft of personal
property is a crime, the police have stood by, she said, as thieves
have grabbed cats and sold them for about $3 to wholesale markets.
There, they are sold to restaurants that often keep the cats and
other live animals in cages for inspection by diners.


Beijing has some stray cats, but house animals present an easier
mark. The thieves, who often operate at night, are said to use fish
and birds to lure wandering cats into their bags. Ms. Lu said that
some fearful cat owners have begun to tether their cats at night to
keep them from prowling the newly perilous alleys.


Eating cat meat is of dubious benefit, said Lin Degui, a
veterinary professor at the Beijing Agriculture University.
Sometimes cats carry parasites dangerous to humans, he told The
Beijing Morning Post, and in Guangdong, several people have been
severely sickened by eating the meat of cats that had consumed rat
poison in the streets.


Ms. Lu described a recent case in which six cats in one
northwestern section of Beijing were stolen the same day, as they
lay on their owners' roofs sunning. The distraught owners searched
nearby restaurants and found the animals in cages. But the local
police refused to help them, saying there was no specific law on
the theft of pets.


The owners later called Ms. Lu's group, she said, and members
went to the restaurant _ only to find the cages already empty, and
six families in tears.

