
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Jan. 2:


In suddenly resigning as Russian president on Friday, Boris
Yeltsin showed once again why he will be remembered as a
practitioner of the unexpected political stratagem. Like so many of
Yeltsin's gambits over the years, the move upended expectations and
scrambled Russian politics. It also came with a promise of immunity
from prosecution for Yeltsin for any misdeeds of his government.
That will likely roil the coming presidential campaign, a fitting
legacy for a courageous but disappointingly erratic man who guided
Russia through the first years of a turbulent, still unfinished
journey from tyranny to democracy.


Yeltsin's action immediately lifted the presidential prospects
of the politician he hopes will succeed him, Prime Minister
Vladimir Putin. Under the Russian Constitution, Putin became acting
president when Yeltsin stepped aside, and the date for new
elections was advanced from June to March. That gives Putin the
powerful advantage of campaigning as an incumbent at a time when
his popularity is surging because of the Russian military offensive
in Chechnya.


Yeltsin, for one last time, seemed to be betting that an
impulsive, bold move would turn Russia toward a more promising
future. As with earlier Yeltsin surprises, a positive outcome is
far from assured. For one thing, the political terrain could shift
abruptly even by March if Russians became disillusioned with the
attack on Chechnya.


Putin's political instincts also remain unclear. He is a former
KGB officer and head of Russia's domestic intelligence agency. As
prime minister, he has prosecuted a brutal assault on Chechnya. Yet
he has encouraged economic reform, has talked of the need to
improve relations with the West and is allied with some of Russia's
most progressive politicians.


After Yeltsin's uneven leadership, Russia could use a steady,
reform-minded president who knows how to run an efficient
government. Yeltsin was the first freely elected leader of Russia.
His great strengths were an iron will and a daring vision for
remaking Russia into a free-market democracy. He was fearless in
his drive to rid Russia of Communism, and his stand against an
attempted coup in 1991 kept reform alive. Later that year he
engineered the end of Communist rule in Moscow and the collapse of
the Soviet empire. History will honor him for these acts.


But Yeltsin proved indifferent at governing. Economic reform was
stunted by corruption, his government failed to collect taxes, and
his penchant for sacking prime ministers often left the Kremlin in
disarray. Opposition in the parliament made governing difficult,
but Yeltsin lacked the discipline to manage a complex government.


Though he broadly pursued closer ties with the West, and played
a helpful role in ending the war in Kosovo last year, Yeltsin could
be inconsistent in dealing with foreign issues. His preoccupation
with Chechnya wounded Russia at home and abroad. Weakened by heart
problems and respiratory ailments, he was in recent years a shell
of the leader he had been in the early 1990s.


Many Russians will doubtless question the sincerity of the
apology Yeltsin offered on Friday for the mistakes he made and the
economic hardships that so many of his countrymen have endured.
More information will be needed before anyone can judge whether the
decision to spare Yeltsin from possible prosecution was warranted
or wise. However, Russians ought not to forget the singular
achievement of Boris Yeltsin. For all his maddening weaknesses, he
led his nation toward democracy after 1,000 years of tyranny.

