
``McCain and Bradley have had enormous breaks in this race _ and
it's still uphill for them,'' said Charles E. Cook Jr., the editor
of a Washington-based political report. ``They still have to thread
a needle.''


Not only does the present primary system reduce the chance of an
outsider winning a nomination, it will likely force them out of the
race sooner, thus reducing the chance that they will help shape the
positions of their party or their nominee. This, in turn, may leave
their supporters feeling shut out of and disinterested in
participating in the political process.


The traditional view among party professionals is that the
system produces a good result for the party: an early nominee.
`It's a bad thing to keep going: you'd rather get it out of the
way,'' said James Carville, the consultant to President Clinton.
``Find one fighter that likes to get hit.''


As the primary season grows shorter each cycle, that
once-dominant view holds less and less sway. ``It's bad for the
candidate because you don't get the same feel for the country,''
said Paul Begala, who worked with Carville in running Clinton's
1992 campaign. ``I traveled with Bill Clinton to 48 states, by my
count. You learn a lot. You see a lot.''


Less time campaigning also means less examination of a
candidates' record, experience and past. And there are tactical
complications posed by becoming the candidate too early.


How does a candidate fill the long months between winning the
nomination and the summer convention? How do they compete with the
Reform Party's likely candidates, notably Donald Trump, who may
have the stage largely to himself in the spring? How do the
campaigns hold on to the voters' attention, or do they at all?
Witness what happened with Bob Dole in 1996, as he struggled to
distance himself from congressional Republicans pushing policies
that played against his own campaign interests.


Indeed, with few exceptions, no one is happy with the way the
system has evolved, and both the national Republican and Democratic
committees have set up commissions to examine how or if to change
it. ``If the front-loading does result in people believing they do
not play the role they would otherwise, we have to do something
about it,'' said Joe Andrew, the national Democratic chairman.


Richard Bond, the former national Republican chairman, offered a
more fundamental concern about the process. ``I'm a gray-hair now,
and the gray-hairs of the Republican Party think it's better to
have a primary than not,'' Bond said. ``Because your guy gets
tested. A feverish contest that would resolve early enough is the
prescription for success.''

