
Not content to sit pat a day after assuming power in
Russia, the acting president, Vladimir Putin, reminded voters
Saturday why they like him so much, with a surprise visit to troops
fighting the war in Chechnya.


Putin's overnight trip to the Russian-held city of Gudermes, to
present soldiers with medals and with hunting knives engraved with
his signature, and to offer a ringing vote of support for their
efforts to crush separatist militants, bore the traits that make
him the favorite to win in a landslide in an early presidential
vote set for March 26.


Here was the vigor, the flair for the unexpected and the gift
for populist politics that Russians once associated with Boris N.
Yeltsin, the man who stepped down on Friday to make way for Putin.
Very quickly, Putin appears to be acquiring Yeltsin's knack for
using the power of his position to project his popularity.


But Putin's trip to Chechnya, on his first full day on the job,
also served as a reminder that other than his hawkish leadership of
the war effort, little is known about the former spy from St.
Petersburg, who now holds sway in the Kremlin and who enjoys a
soaring popularity rating. His political and economic views remain
a mystery, even to veteran observers.


``After watching Putin for years, I still don't really know who
he is,'' said Alexander Gorshkov, a St. Petersburg-based
investigative journalist. ``In four months as prime minister he
hasn't done anything other than Chechnya. We still don't know what
his plans are for the economy.''


But Gorshkov and other analysts expressed doubt that the
questions surrounding Putin amount to enough to derail his drive to
win the presidency. In a turnaround, the man who was widely
ridiculed as an obscure and bland nonentity when Yeltsin anointed
him his successor in August is now seen by many Russians as someone
who can put a halt to a decade of decline.


While much of Putin's support is based on the perceived success
of the war in Chechnya, he has also tapped into deeply held
emotions in Russian society. He is seen as being strong and
decisive in standing up for Russian interests after a decade of
perceived capitulation to former Cold War enemies.


``Putin's popularity goes beyond the war,'' said Vladimir
Pribylovsky, a member of the Panorama research center. ``He
represents a nostalgic stereotype of a decisive leader with a
strong hand who will defend Russia's independent interests without
bowing to the West.''


Putin has used his weaknesses to his advantage. A lackluster
public speaker, he uses simple, clipped phrases, often spiced with
tough-guy jargon. The public has taken to this and sees it as a
refreshing no-nonsense style _ which is appealing to Russians who
are weary of lofty rhetoric and high-minded promises. Most of
Russia's prime ministers in the past ten years have been
technocrats who talk about loans and deficits and inflation and
financial policies. But in Russia, more than just the economy
matters.


``Putin personifies the hopes people have that things can be
changed for the better,'' said Alexei Grazhdankin, deputy director
of the All-Russia Center for Public Opinion Research. ``People
don't want miracles, they just want order, and Putin has given the
impression that he is providing order.''


Grazhdankin said that Putin's background in the Soviet
intelligence community, and later as director of the main successor
to the KGB, the Federal Security Service, or FSB, is an asset with
much of the public. Many Russians now think of the Soviet-era
security services as an important ingredient for law and order that
has been lost, rather than a tool of repression whose passing
should be celebrated.


Putin, according to Grazhdankin, evokes in many the image of
late Soviet leader Yury Andropov, who ran the KGB before ascending
to the pinnacle of power in the Soviet Union. Some view Andropov's
brief reign _ he died in February 1984 after just 15 months in
office _ as a missed opportunity for national revival. The
widely-accepted view of the KGB of that era is of a force engaged
in trying to reform the Soviet Union from within by closing the
large economic and technological gap between it and the West.


Most of Putin's public statements center around the need for
powerful central authority to restore Russia's confidence in itself
and preserve its place as a stable world power.


``A strong state for Russians is not an anomaly, not something
that must be fought for or against, but on the contrary, it is the
source and guarantor of order, the initiator and driving force of
all change,'' Putin said in a statement issued last week at a
conference of the upstart Unity political party, which parlayed his
backing to a strong second place finish in recent parliamentary
elections despite being just two months old. ``Russia will not
soon, if ever, become a copy of, say, the United States or England,
where liberal values have deep historical traditions.''


If Putin's past, and his views, have raised doubts in the West,
its leaders have gone out of their way to hide them. President
Clinton told Putin in a telephone call Saturday that US-Russia
relations under Putin's leadership were ``off to a good start''
despite differences on Chechnya and other issues, the White House
said.


Saturday in Chechnya, Putin praised officers and soldiers in
Gudermes, 18 miles east of Chechnya's capital, Grozny, where
Russian planes and artillery pounded rebels in an effort to capture
the city Saturday.


``This is not just about restoring the honor and dignity of
Russia,'' Putin said in remarks broadcast live on Russian
television early Saturday. ``It is rather more important than that.
It is about putting an end to the break-up of the Russian
Federation. That is the main task. Russia is grateful to you.''


Before he left the republic, Putin said that Russia would pursue
its current military tactics in Chechnya, adding that he had
developed the tactics himself.


``We are going to do everything in an optimal way,'' Putin said.
``Optimal means the fewest possible casualties among our troops and
the absence of casualties among civilians.''


Up to 40,000 mostly elderly and infirm civilians are trapped in
Grozny. Residents have been huddled for weeks in basements, too
afraid to go outside or risk the journey through the Russian
bombardment to escape Grozny.


Saturday, waves of low-flying Russian jets unleashed scores of
bombs on the shattered city in one of the biggest attacks yet on
the Chechen capital, according to news agencies in Grozny. Tanks
and artillery surrounding Grozny fired barrages into the city. But
federal forces were apparently far from capturing the city and were
taking heavy losses, although no figures were available.


But Russia's state-controlled media have ironed out the awkward
details of the war, just as they have helped build up Putin's image
while slamming his potential rivals in the presidential vote _
former Prime Minister Yevgeny Primakov, Moscow Mayor Yury Luzhkov
and Communist leader Gennady Zyuganov _ with a constant stream of
allegations of wrongdoing, duplicity and illness.


Putin Saturday denied that the New Year visit to the troops was
a planned opening of his election campaign, saying the trip was set
up months ago. The trip nevertheless demonstrated the way the
state-controlled media have helped his popularity rating soar to 70
percent. Putin was shown flying in a Su-25 ground attack jet,
touring villages captured from Chechen rebels, and demonstrating
his black-belt prowess in judo.


Putin has managed to garner support from across Russia's
spectrum of elites. The military and security services support him
because he has increased the defense budget and is giving them a
free hand in Chechnya.


Nationalists support him because he is not afraid to talk tough
with the West. Russia's business and financial elite support him
because he has promised not to redistribute the former government
property they privatized, often on very favorable terms, during
Yeltsin's eight years in office.


But at the same time, Putin is seen by the public as being
independent from these special interest groups. That is probably
only half-true. Putin has relied on high oil prices to fuel his war
effort and lend the Russian economy, which depends heavily on the
export of raw materials, the look of recovery.


He has presided over the Kremlin's effort to take control of the
lucrative revenue from Russia's oil pipeline and railway transport
monopolies, which some analysts say has provided financial backing
for Unity's political campaign.


The top officials associated with this effort, Yeltsin's former
chief of administration Alexander Voloshin and first deputy Prime
Minister Nikolai Aksyonenko, are seen as closely linked to the
financier and informal Kremlin adviser Boris Berezovsky, long
rumored as a main strategist behind the Yeltsin presidency. Both
Aksyonenko and Voloshin look set to keep their jobs under Putin.


``If that happens, the system of shadow influence remains the
same,'' said Mikhail Berger, editor of the Segodnya daily
newspaper.


Financial markets soared on the news of Putin's appointment,
hoping that a an energetic, popular leader would finally be able to
make the hard decisions needed to spur Russia's long-delayed
economic recovery.


But the central question surrounding Putin's future economic
plans is the relationship he creates with Berezovsky and other
financial elites, known here as ``the oligarchs.'' Under Yeltsin,
this group's insider practices and offshore dealings have come to
symbolize the way big business has thrived despite the rest of the
country, rather than fueling a national economic revival.


``The central question in Russia's economy today,'' said Sergei
Parkhomenko, editor of Itogi magazine, ``is whether Putin will
control the oligarchs or whether they will control him.''

