
Key utilities and government officials across the country
declared victory over the Y2K software bug Saturday, raising hopes
that business computers will also operate smoothly as the workweek
begins.


Major electric generating and transmission companies, water
services, telecommunications providers, and banks reported few
problems associated with the rollover to Jan. 1, 2000.


Considering fears that the date change might cause blackouts and
other big disruptions, what did emerge seemed minor, such as faulty
dates on some Massachusetts state e-mail. Other issues bordered on
the comic, such as problems at certain financial Web sites that
temporarily assigned one man in Maine a $76 million windfall.


``We are in much better shape than anyone would have
predicted,'' John Koskinen, President Clinton's top Y2K adviser,
said at a news conference in Washington. ``We have not been able to
find anything of great significance to report here.''


``For most Y2K (issues), success is already achieved,'' echoed
Dennis DiMarzio, chief operating officer for the City of Boston.


The most significant setback reported by the US government
involved a military spy system that was blinded for three hours
after a satellite data-processing unit crashed. Service was
partially restored within a few hours, said Deputy Defense
Secretary John Hamre.


After months of intense worry about readiness of major
institutions, the smooth transition raised the ironic question of
whether too much money and attention might have been paid to the
potential glitch. The answer may not be known for weeks as
organizations discover whether mundane problems might add up to
anything significant.


But given the stakes, the progress reports from some of the
economy's most important sectors suggested that Y2K at least had
become an economic issue rather than a matter of civil order.


Officials said they were especially pleased that so few problems
seemed to emerge related to ``embedded'' computer chips, which are
built into many devices such as traffic lights and were often hard
to test in advance.


At Boston Edison's command center in Dorchester, by 1 a.m.
Saturday the utility's chief Y2K planner, Jim Ashkar, had shifted
his attention from keeping the lights on to making sure the
company's billing and payroll systems worked as designed.


``We won't be tarred and feathered by the customers,'' he said
after it seemed clear the region's lights would stay on. But
looking forward, he noted, ``We could still be tarred and feathered
by our shareholders.''


``Maybe it was good for Y2K to come along,'' said Boston Mayor
Thomas M. Menino. ``It forced us to do some work we probably would
have postponed for a while.''


Throughout the United States, worries began to ease Friday as
few problems emerged as midnight arrived overseas.


At the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency's underground
command center in Framingham, dozens of relieved officials clapped
and hugged at 12:01 a.m. Saturday as lights stayed on and public
celebrations continued uninterrupted.


By Saturday afternoon the state's chief Y2K planner, Val
Asbedian, said he knew of only ``cosmetic'' difficulties around
Massachusetts, such as problems with the phone system of a state
college he declined to identify. Asbedian said he expected only
``nuisances or embarrassments'' would emerge when the workweek
begins.


The North American Electric Reliability Council, the utility
trade group responsible for monitoring the nation's power system,
said data clocks at eight utilities failed a time-check at midnight
Greenwich Mean Time, or 7 p.m. Friday on the East Coast.


No power operations were impacted as a result, the group said.
Federal officials reported problems at five nuclear power plants,
which face stricter monitoring than most power facilities.


Problems included faults in card-readers that control building
access. At the Millstone nuclear power plant in Waterford, Conn.,
programs that monitor wind-speed and radiation emissions failed and
had to be reset, the government reported. Spokespeople for
Northeast Utilities, the plant's owner, couldn't be reached for
comment.


Business consultants like Steve Goldberg in Needham said they
weren't ready to call Y2K a nonevent, noting that more than half of
all business PCs won't even be turned on Monday morning. ``All we
know so far is that the infrastructure held, but that's good
news,'' he said.


With their lights on and television sets working, thousands of
office workers assigned to overtime duties in Boston's financial
district found themselves with little to do in the early morning
hours Saturday.


At FleetBoston Financial's command center at One Federal St.,
company spokesman Jim Shepker said the region's largest bank began
sending call-center representatives home at 2 a.m. Saturday.


``They simply were not being used,'' Shepker said. Once the
lights stayed on, he said, ``customers weren't worried.''
Altogether the bank had 4,000 workers on duty over the weekend,
2,800 more than usual.


Spokespeople for other big financial institutions in the region
including Fidelity Investments, State Street Corp., and Citizens
Financial Group said they had nothing to report Saturday.


Hospitals and health-care services were also seen as vulnerable
to Y2K-related glitches, but no troubles were found at major
institutions including Beth Israel-Deaconess Medical Center and at
Newton-Wellesley Hospital.


At the John F. Kennedy Federal Building downtown, a fire alarm
system malfunctioned and had to be reset Saturday morning,
officials said, though the cause of the problem was unclear.


Business at Logan Airport, off dramatically on Friday and early
Saturday because of travelers' concerns about the bug, picked back
up at noon. About 80 percent of the flights normally scheduled for
a Saturday were expected to operate for the day, said Jose Juves, a
spokesman for the Massachusetts Port Authority.


Federal Aviation Administration officials reported two problems
believed to be Y2K-related, but both were fixed immediately and did
not affect traffic. One involved printers at oceanic air traffic
facilities in New York and Oakland, Calif. In the other case, files
with the date ``00'' were wiped out of a weather advisory system.


Other problems seemed to involve lower stakes. In Delaware, slot
machines at three racetracks refused to take bets, apparently
because of the date change.


In Stockton Springs, Maine, schoolteacher Bill Carpenter said he
logged on to a financial Web site run by Microsoft Corp. at 12:15
a.m. Saturday to discover a decimal-place error in his on-line
stock portfolio had resulted in a $76 million windfall.


``It was a great moment!'' he said. ``We were lighting cigars
with $20 bills for an hour.'' After promising several party guests
$1 million apiece, Carpenter said he logged back on at 1:30 a.m.
only to see his gains had been erased. ``I'm still not sure what to
tell them,'' he said of his friends.


A spokeswoman for Microsoft Corp. blamed the error on faulty
data provided by a contractor she declined to name; other on-line
services including AltaVista and YYY also reported difficulties.
With weekend Y2K efforts an apparent success, businesses Saturday
began to focus on what else might turn up. Kevin Lamont, a manager
at the HMV Record Store in Harvard Square, said he is more
confident that serious problems have been avoided. ``It does feel
good to know that it's over,'' Lamont said.


In Washington, Bruce McConnell, head of a United Nations-backed
Y2K coordination center, credited everything from international
cooperation to ``good luck'' to minimizing Y2K woes.


Based on the weekend results, he said, ``Starting Monday, we
will hear of many errors, but most of them will not pose serious
problems and will be quickly fixed.''

