
On his first full day as Russia's acting president,
Vladimir Putin left before dawn to visit with Russian troops
fighting in Chechnya.


While his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, spent his first day of
retirement at a government country house outside Moscow, Putin and
his wife, Lyudmila _ he in a turtleneck sweater, she in pants and a
sheepskin coat _ spent what was left of the momentous New Year's
holiday greeting Russian soldiers and handing out hunting knives as
presidential souvenirs.


Besides offering the nation a new image of an active, concerned
leader, the visit reflected Putin's close association with the
Chechnya battle. Since he was named prime minister in August as a
largely unknown KGB officer, his visibility and popularity have
soared with the conduct of the campaign in Chechnya.


But now the war has apparently entered a far more difficult
phase as Russian troops seek to dislodge Chechen fighters from
Grozny, the capital. And Putin's success in presidential elections
now scheduled for March 26 could well hinge on the success of the
campaign, and the ability of the Russian commanders to hold down
their casualties.


In Gudermes, the second-largest city in Chechnya, which is now
in Russian hands, Putin said: ``We are not going to liberate
anything quickly. We are going to do our best. The best means with
the least losses among our personnel, our military men among the
population.''


Putin again said there was no deadline for concluding the war.


The unexpected trip, taken less than 24 hours after Yeltsin
resigned and handed his job to Putin, gave Russians a different
image of their leadership from the hesitant, breath-holding fumbles
and gaffes they had grown used to in the final years of the Yeltsin
era.


In his brief time in office, Putin _ who retains the office of
prime minister _ has crammed in what previously would have been a
week's worth of presidential events, including the taping of a
televised New Year's message, a meeting with the Security Council,
another with his cabinet and two sessions with Yeltsin, including a
final meeting late Friday at the former president's residence.


And at 6.30 p.m. Friday he signed a decree, one of his first as
acting president, which apparently held the key to the sudden but
smooth transfer of power. Besides granting Yeltsin and his family
an array of benefits and privileges, the decree gives him immunity
from criminal investigation, and protects his houses, cars, papers
and belongings from search and seizure.


Dmitri Yakushkin, Yeltsin's press secretary, on Saturday
disputed any suggestion that the president and his former prime
minister had bargained over the terms of the extraordinary transfer
of power Friday.


There were no negotiations, said Yakushkin, who added that the
decree was most likely prepared in advance by Yeltsin's staff.


The decree, described by Yakushkin as seven pages long,
describes in precise detail how much of a salary the former
president will get in the initial months after his resignation (75
percent of his salary), how much money he will have available to
spend on staff, what access he will have to government air and
train terminals, and other perks associated with the top Kremlin
job.


But the immunity clause, limited to the president himself, was
the most striking, hinting at the kinds of concerns that Yeltsin _
whose administration has been scarred by reports of widespread
corruption _ had as he prepared secretly to leave office. Former
aides to Yeltsin have said in the past that the president and his
family would consider early resignation only if their physical
safety and economic security could be guaranteed.


(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


Because Yeltsin was the first democratically elected president
in Russia, there were no precedents for such guarantees. Yeltsin,
who moved into the Kremlin after the dissolution of the Soviet
Union, gave its previous occupant, Mikhail Gorbachev, a generous
package of benefits and privileges and a rent-free office building
when he left office on Dec. 31, 1991. But as Gorbachev was to
discover, those benefits could also be taken away, depending on the
whim and mood of the man who granted them in the first place.


Although Putin's decree ostensibly gives the Yeltsin family the
guarantees it was seeking, the benefits and privileges are still
not fixed in law. Passing a law on the status of former presidents
was a proposal made last summer by former Prime Minister Yevgeny
Primakov, then a leading opposition candidate for the presidency,
as he tried publicly to assuage Yeltsin's anxiety about giving up
his Kremlin job.


But by propelling the presidential elections forward by three
months, thus giving Putin _ his preferred successor and the current
political hero _ a considerable advantage, Yeltsin apparently could
not wait for legislation that would have to clear the Russian
Parliament.


According to Yakushkin, Yeltsin kept his decision to resign a
closely guarded secret until the last minute. Although Putin may
have known ahead of time, no official preparations for such a
hand-over of power were made by the Kremlin staff, he said.


As press secretary, he got a call early in the morning, and
found Yeltsin in his Kremlin office at 8:30 a.m., ready to tape the
broadcast that went on the Russian government channel at noon
Friday. All day Friday, Yeltsin was very calm and friendly,
Yakushkin said. Yeltsin gave flowers to the television crew, drank
Champagne and said goodbye to many people with whom he had worked.
That was the mood of the day.

