
Am I the only one who has trouble with Michael Jordan being
ESPN's Athlete of the Century, or the only one wondering whether he
should even have been the top basketball player?


That designation should go, inarguably, to Bill Russell. And I'm
not the only one.


``What is the game all about? Is it for a team to win? Or a guy
to score a lot of points,'' said former Celtics great Tom Heinsohn.
``Nobody won more than Russell did.''


He's absolutely correct. That Russell ranked behind Jordan,
Magic Johnson, and Wilt Chamberlain on ESPN's list is a travesty.
Not only did he win 11 NBA titles in 13 years, he revolutionized
the game at both ends. He also never lost a so-called
``winner-take-all'' game, whether at San Francisco, the Olympics,
or in the NBA.


``He was worth 60 points a night to us,'' Heinsohn said. ``He
made teams change their offensive game plans and he made them
change their defensive game plans. Did Michael Jordan ever do that?
The answer is nobody did, except Russell.''


Heinsohn has several Russell stories, but one of his favorites
is the time he, Russell, and some other NBA All-Stars were touring
overseas and scheduled to play against the Yugoslav National Team.


``They had this redheaded kid who they said was the world's
greatest scorer,'' Heinsohn said. ``Well, they got us mad when they
wouldn't play our anthem or put up our flag. Then Red (Auerbach)
went to Russell and said, `See that kid? They say he's the world's
greatest scorer. I don't want him to score.'


``Russell blocked every single shot that kid took and he finally
was ejected for throwing the ball at Russ after he blocked another
of his shots.''


My friend and colleague, Sam Smith of the Chicago Tribune, once
tried to convince me that if David Robinson had joined the Celtics
in 1956, and if Russell had joined the Spurs in 1990, there would
be no difference in the number of rings. I passed that along to
Heinsohn.


``What has David Robinson ever done? He's not even as good as
Walt Bellamy,'' Heinsohn sniffed.


Rumbling along


Random ramblings as a new year dawns and we consider the single
most inexplicable phenomenon of the 1999-2000 NBA season: What
possesses more than 20,000 people to regularly attend Bulls games?
. . . The 10-member committee charged with the burdensome task of
selecting the final three members of the 2000 Olympic Team will
meet via conference call Tuesday to throw names about and get some
needed levity from committee member Kevin McHale. You listen to Rod
Thorn, the committee overseer, and it almost sounds like it really
matters which players they choose. ``We need a big guy, a slasher
who can play a couple positions, and a shooter, because we're going
to see a lot of zones,'' Thorn says, trying to sound earnest. The
leading candidates are the Lakers' Shaquille O'Neal for the big
man, the Pistons' Grant Hill for the slasher, and, depending on the
time of day, Milwaukee's Ray Allen, Toronto's Vince Carter, or
Charlotte's Eddie Jones for the shooter's job. Shaq has told
reporters he's not interested, but, Thorn says, ``He says a lot of
things. He hasn't told any of us.'' Wonder if Shaq knows that
training camp is in Maui and that, save for a brief swing through
Tokyo, USA Basketball is allowing ``guests'' to join the players on
their six-week Olympic experience? ``It's going to be a lot more
comparable to 1992, (when the Dream Team ``practiced'' in Monaco)
than to 1996,'' says Craig Miller of USA Basketball. The nine
members already on the team are Tim Duncan, Kevin Garnett, Tom
Gugliotta, Vin Baker, Allan Houston, Gary Payton, Tim Hardaway,
Steve Smith, and Jason Kidd. Yup, they need three more biggies to
keep the gold . . . Gugliotta, meanwhile, has been cleared to
return to practice after his frightening seizure Dec. 17. Doctors
now say that Googs took an over-the-counter dietary supplement that
does not have FDA approval. He did it, he says, to help him sleep.
(Ever hear of Tylenol PM?) Googs sounded thankful, grateful, lucky,
in talking to reporters after his first workout. ``What burns me is
that I took something I didn't know too much about. That's just not
right to do and it nearly cost me my life,'' he said. The Suns are
trying to stay afloat despite a coaching change and the losses of
three starters. Googs, Shawn Marion (pre-Christmas knee surgery),
and Penny Hardaway (plantar fascia) are all out. Penny just had a
soft cast put on his right foot. But what he has is incredibly
painful and disabling. The Suns feel he could be out three more
weeks, which could mean he'll miss the Suns' lone Boston appearance
later this month (Jan. 28). Marion is out indefinitely.


Kukoc comes back


Speaking of returning to practice, Toni Kukoc, who has had the
worst case of either back spasms or Croatia Dreaming, is practicing
again. The Bulls are hoping he'll play well enough and long enough
to get them to four wins by the All-Star break . . . For years,
Utah was the rock of NBA franchises. In addition to the John
Stockton/Karl Malone tandem, the Jazz have had the same coach since
December of 1988, the same owner since 1985, and the same franchise
icon (Frank Layden) seemingly forever. Well, now Layden, age 68, is
retiring, making him the third Utah exec to bolt this season. His
son, Scott, left the Jazz as their chief basketball man to take
over the general manager's job with the Knicks. Tim Howells, who
was the general manager, also left to go into private business.
We'll know if things are really bad when Hot Rod Hundley and Ron
Boone leave the broadcast booth . . . RIP Miami Arena. It was in
existence for all of 11 years, which must be some sort of record
for obsolescence. ``Within a year or two, it became obsolete,''
said Miami coach/president Pat Riley, who was decidedly
unsentimental about leaving the building. ``We're all happy to
leave Miami Arena.'' How's this for turnover? The Timberwolves have
been in the Target Center since 1990 and already it's the
ninth-oldest building in the league. And they remain the only one
of the four expansion teams from the late 1980s that either hasn't
moved to a new building or isn't planning to move. The oldest arena
continues to be Madison Square Garden, but it has been modernized.
Houston (1975), Dallas (1980), and New Jersey (1981) now are the
oldest, non-improved venues. The Rockets may have to move after
voters turned down an arena referendum (but that was before they
had a chance to see Steve Francis) while Dallas has plans for a new
building. The Nets ought to blow up Continental Airlines Arena and
start over.


Barkley bears gifts


So, did the NBA Christmas Party this year lack for finger food
because Charles Barkley had to unexpectedly retire? ``Not at all,''
cracked Thorn. ``Charles was kind enough to send us two substantial
donations before he retired.'' Thorn was referring to Barkley's
fines for fighting with Shaq and dissing referee Mike Mathis . . .
Keep an eye on the Hornets. Their Thursday loss to Indiana left
them two games behind the Pacers and they have what can only be
called a brutal Western swing starting Tuesday. They play four
games in five days against the Suns, Jazz, Lakers, and Nuggets.
Then, before returning home, they stop off in Milwaukee. ``I think
we can do some damage out there,'' says coach Paul Silas. They'll
be doing all this, more than likely, without Jones, although he's
ahead of schedule in recovering from an elbow injury . . . Through
the wonders of satellite technology, I have discovered that the
last name of the Mavericks' second-year forward, Dirk Nowitzki,
coveted at draft time 1998 by Rick Pitino, is actually pronounced
No-vitz-ki. (Anyone with a passing knowledge of German could, of
course, have told me that.) However you say it, the kid can stroke
it. He hit the Lakers for 19 in the fourth quarter alone in a
2-point loss at the Staples Center. The Mavericks, while undeniably
abysmal, have had their share of bad luck. In addition to injuries,
they had to play 17 of their first 29 on the road. That might help
to put their record somewhat in perspective. JR Rider, suspended
indefinitely. Plus ca change, etc.

