
It was not until after the Players' Riot of 2019, in which
hundreds of fans were injured and two died, that America began to
take seriously the possibility that sports was no national campfire
but rather a dangerously out-of-control brush fire that could
consume the entire country. The president's hastily assembled
Rocker Commission summed up the situation in this plaintive
statement: ``Twenty years ago, a grown man in a New York Rangers
jersey would be an object of mild amusement. Ten years ago, he
would be questioned by mental health authorities. Today, he would
be detained by the police as a potential terrorist. How has this
happened?''


How indeed has the relationship between athlete and fan become
one of such mutual rage that the Plexiglas walls of hockey arenas
have been extended to completely enclose the rinks. Basketball
games are once again played inside metal cages. Because the armed
guards at major baseball and football games were mostly retired
players, they refused to open fire when the athletes finally
stormed the stands. They watched the carnage with detachment, if
not some delight.


Why did love turn into hate?


The commission's anthology of learned answers was predictable
and unsatisfying: social, economic and physical disparities, it
maintained, had created such a psychological gulf that ``player
regarded fan as `the other' and fan objectified the player as a
cartoon figure, thus removing any common ground of humanity and
empathy.''


As the commission chairman, professor John Rocker, a
distinguished historian and psycho-analyst, pointed out: ``From my
own experience as a young player, I can understand how ignorance
and fear, inflamed by media stereotypes, can lead to the breakdown
of society. Frankly, it was just a matter of time. Look at
history.''


That the Players' Riot (the Players' Association preferred to
call it the Players' Defense) occurred 100 years after the 20th
century's sports nadir _ the 1919 Black Sox scandal _ and 50 years
after its zenith _ the year in which the Jets and the Mets won
championships and the Knicks began their great title run _ was
proof to some that it was merely the dip of a cycle. In time,
sports would swing back into the national affection.


But the commission, calling the Riot a watershed event from
which sports might never fully recover, cited a series of smaller
events that had led up to it:


_ By the turn of the century, the amoral, outrageous,
thrill-driven sensibility of professional wrestling had pushed
other sports to turn up their heat. Purists were most concerned
about Major League Baseball's secret quota of one bench-clearing
fight per team per month, with pacifists fined.


_ Extreme sports, a short-lived pastime for increasingly
short-lived people, was eventually banned; the ABC show ``Snuff
Sport,'' in which it was alleged that ambulance crews were
purposely given misdirections, is still defending lawsuits. But
harpoon fights between teams in war canoes and dogfights between
World War I fighter plane replicas created a climate in which
recreational athletes became ashamed to play noncontact sports like
golf, tennis and softball. Thus, spectatorship rose dramatically.


_ Those who continued to want to compete in some way turned to
Virtual Games (known also as Zelig Games) in which hologram
representations were inserted into classic and later live events.
Eventually, a generation raised with advanced video skills was able
to win in mock contests with real athletes, often by cheating.


_ As traditional male sports continued to be devalued, women
sports ascended. Women's tennis, soccer and volleyball eclipsed the
men's games, while it became necessary in men's minor-league
baseball, football and basketball to require a certain number of
female athletes per team to assure attendance. There was great
controversy over the possibility of such requirements in the major
leagues.


_ Cablevision's computerized ``call-the-shot meters,'' enabling
fans to vote on such coaching decisions as run-pass or
substitutions in specified games, was a sensation for several
seasons, especially after bad decisions were purposely sent in by
gamblers. But then Fox Interactive introduced betting on individual
plays, and fans voted with their wallets.


_ With ballparks and arenas no more than stage sets (ESPN's
attempt to use digitized crowds was blocked by the actors' guilds),
the so-called moderate, or cultural, fans, once seen occasionally
at major events, disappeared. There were only the corporate fans in
the luxury sky boxes and the hard-core fans in the hard seats.


It was the mounting tension between the hard-cores and the
players while the sky boxers egged them all on, according to the
Rocker Commission, that set the scene for the Riot.


The game in which it occured, between the Gainesville Dells and
the South Bend Compaqs of the Microsoft League, was the renewal of
a traditionally violent rivalry. The two cities were still reeling
over the demise of Division I college football, set in motion by a
minor scandal at Notre Dame in 1999.


The NFL had easily established minor league teams, administered
by former college athletic departments, but they were seen as
mercenary gangs who didn't even pretend to read or write.


Microsoft Leaguers, a volatile mix of high school stars and NFL
has-beens, played a particularly brutal game while their fans
frequently fought in the stands. They were urged on by skyboxers
who floated flaming dollar bills down among the hoi polloi.


On this Thursday night, despite dogs, sky-cams, metal detectors
and random frisks, a fan smuggled a folding plastic cross-bow into
the stadium. Late in a close game, an arrow hit a 400-pound lineman
in the buttock. When he eventually noticed, he became enraged and
led both teams over the moat, past the guards, through the
electrified fence and into the stands. Apparently assuming that it
would become another Dells versus Compaqs free-for-all, fans stood
up to meet them.


But this time, the players were loyal to each other, not to
uniforms. It was athletes vs. fans, and with few exceptions, it was
no contest. The massacre ended because the players, exhausted from
the game, ran out of steam and allowed those fans still standing to
run away.


The guards regrouped and raced up to protect the sky-box level,
which was spared. This is probably why few athletes were charged
with felonies.


Six months later, professor Rocker had tears in his eyes when he
announced the findings of his commission.


``We have become two Americas, jock and fan,'' he said. ``Two
peoples who need each other desperately have somehow been divided.
I would fear for the future of the nation, if I didn't see a
positive in all this.


``Both groups, jock and fan, are remarkably similar, filled with
immigrants who don't speak good English, gays, ex-cons, and even
some 20-year-old single moms. Remembering my own misguided, yet
somehow prophetic, remarks of the last century, I am filled with
hope that we finally have something here to build on.''

