
In a north-central Phoenix strip mall, a Russian market is
sandwiched between a Hispanic salon and a Vietnamese restaurant.


The Phoenix area has at least nine Spanish-language radio
stations, two Spanish-language television stations, and too many
Hispanic magazines, newspapers and newsletters to count.
Spanish-language billboards are springing up throughout Phoenix.


In east Phoenix, a sprawling Chinese cultural center beckons
freeway drivers.


The number of small or home-based businesses owned by
African-Americans is thought to have doubled in less than 10 years,
to as many as 7,000.


The Los Angeles edition of Korea Times has opened a branch
office in the Phoenix area.


Maricopa County is second only to Los Angeles County for the
largest population of Indians in the nation.


Barring unforeseen changes in migration and birth trends,
Arizona minorities, led by Hispanics, are likely to become a
majority within 40 years.


Changes in the ethnic and racial composition of the Phoenix
area, under way for more than a decade, are transforming what was
once a mainly Anglo community into a place of many hues.


The change has been speeded in recent years by a variety of
factors: the lure of steady job growth; an influx of foreign
refugees; the continuing urbanization of Native Americans; and
historically high fertility rates among Hispanic women.


And the process will continue well into the new century.


``If you look at the new economy, the changing demographics,
there's no question . . . our Valley will change, and it will
change dramatically,'' said Loui Olivas, assistant vice president
of academic affairs at Arizona State University and a professor in
the ASU College of Business.


The change will be measured not simply in numbers, but by
cultural shifts affecting media, language, the arts and
institutions such as schools and government.


Clearly, one major engine driving these changes is rapid
economic expansion.


John Cox, 44, an Irish computer consultant, moved to the Phoenix
from Spain 1 1/2 years ago because he saw in the region ``more
possibilities for growth and access to technologies in a shorter
time frame.''


However, Arizona growth patterns also are linked to the area's
unique demographic characteristics. The most visible growth during
the next few decades will take place in the Hispanic community,
which in the Phoenix area grew by roughly 60 percent in the past
decade. Roughly 1 million Hispanics live in Arizona, more than half
in Maricopa County.


An analysis of 1990 and 1995 census tract head counts shows
Hispanics posting gains in every corner of the Phoenix area. The
largest often occurred in neighborhoods ringing the metro area,
defying stereotypes about minority concentrations in the inner
city.


This rapid growth is not surprising, given the region's Hispanic
roots and traditionally strong ties to Mexico. If anything,
officials believe, the size of the Hispanic community is
underestimated.


Tom Rex, research manager at ASU's Center for Business Research,
said the census routinely undercounts Hispanics in the region. It
occurs in part because illegal immigrants from Mexico and Central
America, whose number is unknown, avoid contact with census
enumerators.


Currently, about 11 percent of Arizona's population is believed
to be foreign-born, ranking it eighth in the nation. The majority
are Mexicans, and they will keep coming.


Foreign immigration tells only part of the story, however.


Many Hispanic families have been in Arizona for generations.
Others were lured from elsewhere in the Southwest by jobs and
opportunity. The larger the community becomes, the more opportunity
it offers.


It is also distinctive: The median age among Arizona Hispanics
is 23, and they are having more children than other racial or
ethnic groups.


Nearly three-fourths of Hispanic households in the state have
children, most ages 6 to 12, one study for the Hispanic Chamber of
Commerce says. In Maricopa County, which has the state's most
affluent Hispanic community, Hispanic households average more than
four people each, well above the state average of 2.6.


Meanwhile, the number of births per 1,000 Hispanic women in
Arizona increased by 143.5 percent from 1983 to 1997, while births
among White non-Hispanic women dropped by about 16 percent over the
same span. In 1997, the birth rate for Arizona Hispanic women was
twice the rate of White non-Hispanic women.


Those factors will propel the Hispanic community's growth for
decades.


``You're looking at a community that is young and vibrant,''
Olivas said.


Projections suggest Arizona's Hispanic population will grow by
93 percent through 2025, compared with 13 percent for the White,
non-Hispanic community. Although Rex cautions against predicting
demographic and migration trends too far into the future, the U.S.
census projects Hispanics alone will be a majority in Arizona by
2045.


This year's first-graders, the graduating Class of 2011, is
expected to be the state's first in which a majority of high school
graduates will be Hispanic.


``It behooves us to make sure all the investments are made in
education,'' Olivas said.


Hispanic access to health care and medical insurance will be a
major issue ahead. Labor and pay-equity issues also will move to
the fore as minorities demand economic equality. Spanish-language
advertising and media will expand.


``As the constituency here matures, they'll elect more
(Hispanic) people to be council members and in the Legislature,''
predicted Pete Garcia, executive director of Chicanos Por La Causa.
``In the political spectrum, you'll see Hispanics on both sides of
the fence. You'll see many more individuals involved in business
leadership.''


But the Hispanic community won't be alone in its emergence.
Phoenix's combination of jobs, weather and growth is attracting
people of all backgrounds.


From 1990 to 1998, the census estimates, the county's population
grew by nearly a third, to 2.7 million. More than half a million
newcomers were White. More than 200,000 were Hispanic, roughly
40,000 were Black, nearly 30,000 were Asian, and 12,000 were Native
American.


Although the Phoenix African-American community is comparatively
small _ an estimated 117,000 Blacks lived in the Phoenix area in
1998 _ its economic clout is growing. That, in turn, is attracting
more African-American residents. One study placed Arizona among the
Top 10 states with the largest increases in Black buying power
during the '90s.


The metro area's Asian-American community is growing the fastest
_ by an estimated 75 percent in the past eight years _ but it, too,
is comparatively small, with fewer than 70,000 members in 1998.


``The Korean-American community here is the fastest-growing
among the Asian communities,'' said Michelle Kim, a businesswoman
who helped create the non-profit Korean Cultural Center in Phoenix.


She estimates the Phoenix area Korean-American population has
tripled in the past dozen years, and she believes the trend will
continue as the community gains more visibility.


``That number started growing, beginning from when Los Angeles
had its riots,'' Kim said. ``After that, people started looking
around, trying to get out of California.''


Tram Chu, another Phoenix area businesswoman, said the
Vietnamese community has blossomed nearly as quickly, mostly
through the efforts of church-based refugee relocation programs.
Vietnamese communities hosting mom-and-pop businesses have cropped
up in several parts of the Phoenix, and Chu anticipates the pace
will accelerate in the next decade.

