
The most anticipated new year in a millennium, and we
watched it on TV.


Coverage of the year 2000's arrival showed that TV has
transformed us not into a global village, but a global couch. By
today, the whole country takes for granted a hundred New Year's
images from around the world: a wildly exploding Eiffel Tower; an
old man and young boy rowing a canoe out into the Pacific in
Kiribati; the spider-like climbers on Sydney's opera house. People
suddenly know Tonga, know Wellington is New Zealand's capital, know
who made the crystal ball that dropped in Times Square.


The morning-to-midnight (and then some) coverage of this New
Year's Eve was mostly a bust for news, but a boon for TV as
international tour guide. The whole world was reduced to niche
programming, and even broadcast TV became more like a special free
weekend preview of the Discovery Channel. All the Y2K glitch
expectations and terrorist rumors that mobilized the media in the
first place left platoons of virus-hunting reporters with little to
say or do.


By Saturday morning, ABC's Sam Donaldson, stuck the previous day
cooling his heels at the Y2K command center in Washington (``We're
spinning cobwebs here,'' he moaned), snarled: ``Still no major acts
of terrorism to report. No Y2K problems...'' Still, there was hope
in his voice...


It was kind of a relief. We've come to expect TV to
overcompensate when news doesn't arrive on cue _ to pretend like
there's news whether there's news or not. Those great gaps of
nothingness that TV pretended to fill during the Clinton-Lewinsky
scandal, and the deaths of Princess Diana and John Kennedy Jr. _
they were like dress rehearsals for covering the new millennium.


Faced on Friday with nothing but breaking news-free air _ except
for the wee-hours exceptions of CNN turning to the hostage release
in Afghanistan and Russian president Boris Yeltsin's resignation,
events ABC gave lip service to _ TV finally just let the air fill
itself.


It was a curious experiment for ABC. The network played at being
CNN for a day, keeping its news division _ and, with a slightly
gimmicky feel, Jennings _ on 24 straight hours.


``Welcome to the very edge of the millennium, you hearty
souls,'' a confident, bright-eyed Jennings offered Friday at 4:50
a.m., striding around a hangar-like studio that overlooked Times
Square, which he occassionally waved out to, as if giving a papal
blessing.


But a few hours past midnight _ having gone through a daybreak
brown jacket, a midnight tux and a party's-over sweater _ Jennings
started to act a little like the up-all-night lab rat he'd become.


``I hope you'll forgive me, but having been here almost 24
hours, you get a little sentimental,'' he said around 3 a.m. Then
he choked up and his voice cracked while he thanked people he
worked with.


But it worked, too. TV can be a swell friend _ no matter what
else it is, it's always there for us _ and seeing the smooth,
worldly Jennings no matter when we tuned in was an odd, TV kind of
comfort.


Yet there was also something a disorienting about it: a 21st
century news-entertainment warp that made one anxious about what's
to come. ABC billed the news that preceded Jennings' arrival Friday
morning as its ``Millennium Pre-Game Show,'' a title that sounded
worse than glib when the news was about hijackers and a Russian
president. When President Clinton appeared at the White House
around 11 a.m. to make a statement about Yeltsin, ABC ignored it,
and stuck instead with the midnight celebration in Beijing (CNN and
Fox News both followed Clinton, though CNN went to a split-screen
of Clinton and China's new year).


CNN, meanwhile, seemed on the defensive much of the time _ in
ABC, it finally had someone bigger than the Fox News clowns to
compete with all day. (Even PBS often showed the same views from
around the world as CNN.)


There were also times, especially early on, when CNN hyped
itself with the unseemliness of an entertainment-driven broadcast
network. On Thursday night, World Today anchor Wolf Blitzer chirped
during the newscast that ``24 hours from now, CNN will be in its
16th hour of millennium coverage!'' He then introduced a
five-minute promo voiced by Larry King. When that ended, Blitzer
slid seamlessly into his next item: ``Let's take a closer look now
at the stock market.''


CNN appeared to be playing at entertainment the same way ABC was
playing at news. The confounding thing is, by the time we reached
the year 2000, both sort of succeeded. Turned out all they really
had to cover was a party.


TV had us on the couch. The question for this new century: How
do we want it to keep us there?


Drew Jubera writes about television for the Atlanta
Journal-Constitution.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

