
So, was Y2K the most overhyped phenomenon in 2,000 years?


Or did the diligence of a world preparing as if for war stave
off the real danger of a cascading technological disaster?


With the once-dreaded year 2000 having arrived in time zone
after time zone with virtually no millennium-bug chaos, it seems
that the many predictions of computer meltdowns, driven by the
shift to the date 01-01-00, could now be widely disparaged as
Chicken Little nonsense. They may even be seen as a conspiracy
perpetrated by self-interested vendors of technology.


The big caveat is that much potential Y2K damage might not
become apparent until the business world goes back to work Monday,
and perhaps not for days or weeks after that.


But the consensus Saturday of a cross-section of government
officials and Y2K specialists seemed to be that the stunningly
uneventful New Year's Eve really did reflect one of civilization's
finer hours.


Years of planning, billions of dollars in investment, and
unprecedented cooperation and information-sharing among nations and
industries clearly paid off when New Year's Day arrived with
seemingly no more glitches than any other.


In some ways, specialists said, the vast sense of anticlimax
that greeted the arrival of the year 2000 reflected widespread
misunderstanding of what Y2K was all about.


While many people viewed Y2K as potentially a small number of
huge problems, technical experts understood that the real risk was
of a huge number of Lilliputian problems that would bog down
society for days or weeks. These efforts would be inconvenient,
costly, and annoying, but in most cases probably far from matters
of life and death. Media-fueled nightmares of crashing airplanes,
plunging elevators, and entire states shivering in the dark were
far off the mark.


If the ``millennium bug'' still has any life, it now looks as
though it could linger as a chronic, low-grade virus. It clearly
will not be an acute heart attack.


Groton computer consultant David J. Hayes, whose car sports a
well-bolted ``Y2K'' license plate, is a former chief information
officer for several area companies. Hayes noted that ``the guy who
invented the term Y2K said at one time that it's going to be death
by 10,000 papercuts,'' Hayes said. ``It's going to be all small
problems, but there are going to be a lot of them.''


``We've gone from the disaster scenario to the hassle
scenario,'' said John Gantz, chief research officer with IDC Corp.
of Framingham, which has been running ``Project Magellan'' to
monitor Y2K problems around the world.


IDC now estimates that computer ``downtime'' connected to
dealing with Y2K will cost the global economy $21 billion this
year. Those impacts may not become clear until this week, because
probably 85 percent of the world's computers were shut off Friday
night, Gantz said.


While $21 billion is one of those numbers that sounds big, in
context it represents barely 1/1,500th of the $32 trillion global
economy. And while there will likely be widespread problems to fix,
every society will be able to attack them in an environment where
the basics of modern life _ electricity, telephones, water
supplies, traffic lights _ seem to be functioning as well as they
ever did.


``I'd have to say that it was massively overhyped,'' Gantz said
of Y2K apocalypse scenarios. ``I believe the work had to be done,
but everyone focused on the most dramatic possible outcomes of what
could have happened. We always said Y2K will appear not as a flood,
but as a lot of leaky basements.''


The true impact of Y2K will be felt as companies and government
agencies deal with balky order processing systems, confused
accounting spreadsheets, and screwed-up transaction records that
may take a few minutes here and an hour there to fix.


Bruce Webster, cochairman of the Washington-based Year 2000
Group, said, ``Most Y2K errors are pretty dull. A program stops
working or it makes a bad calculation. None of this means planes
falling out of the sky or nuclear meltdowns.''


Atlanta telecommunications analyst Jeffrey Kagan said, ``It
looks like the worst most of us will have to deal with is
inconveniences and frustrations, not real problems. Inaccurate
bills. Wrong orders. Late deliveries.''


What is likely to be lost in the finger-pointing over whether
millions of people were unduly panicked about Y2K is that, given
the stakes, officials had no choice but to take on the problem.
Leaving, say, Belgium or the state of Ohio unremedied for Y2K as a
test case for whether Y2K was really serious would have rightly
been dismissed as an absurd option, given the risks and the
interconnectedness of electric grids, telecommunications networks,
and global trade.


Even President Clinton's top Y2K troubleshooter, John Koskinen,
gave voice Saturday to the rhetorical question now on the minds of
many: ``Has this all been hype?''


No way, Koskinen insisted. Rather, the smooth arrival of New
Year's Day from Auckland to Honolulu reflected the governments' and
industry's success in handling ``the biggest management challenge
the world has had in 50 years.


``We should not underestimate the nature of the problem that was
initially there,'' Koskinen said. ``Had the effort not been made,
had the money not been spent, we would be in a very different
situation.''


Peter Judge, spokesman for the Massachusetts Emergency
Management Agency, which helped coordinate monitoring efforts for
state agencies that spent $103 million preparing, said, ``I
personally wouldn't have wanted to be the guy who said, `Nothing is
going to happen. We'll just keep our fingers crossed.' The
potential was catastrophic.''


And it also bears remembering that Y2K anxiety was in some ways
a luxury of prosperous nations. ``Y2K makes no difference in
Nigeria,'' said technician Ayodele Adewale, celebrating the new
year in the streets of Lagos. ``We do not normally have light or
water, so if we do now then it must be a bonus.''


Finally, some think the fact that Y2K came and went without
disasters may also prove to be a turning point for many people in
industrialized, technological societies who feel uncertain about
their growing dependence on computers. Even as they yield countless
benefits for people's work and leisure, digital systems often
inspire mistrust, or a sense that humans are not fully in control.


``The world is going to feel more comfortable with technology
going forward,'' said Gary Beach, publisher of 135,000-circulation
CIO Magazine, a Framingham-based specialty publication for business
information executives.


``Technology did not fail us in the last 24 hours, and it didn't
fail us because of the human aspect, the unbelievable work by men
and women who faced these issues and solved them. This was one of
the best examples of human cooperation in the history of mankind.''

