
The more than 150 hostages freed Friday from
a hijacked Indian Airlines jet savored the simple pleasures on
Saturday that had been denied them for the past week: taking a
shower, sleeping with their legs outstretched and eating a
home-cooked meal.


As the hostages took their first steps back to normal life,
India's top diplomat took the offensive. Foreign Minister Jaswant
Singh defended the government's much-criticized decision to make a
deal with the hijackers _ winning the hostages' freedom by
releasing three jailed militants _ and hinted darkly that India's
archrival, Pakistan, was behind this latest terrorist act.


Singh opened his wrap-up news conference on the hijacking by
listing a string of accusations that implicated Pakistan. The
hijackers were Pakistanis, he said. Most of the 36 militants they
wanted released were Pakistanis, he added.


And the hijackers and three terror suspects whom India handed
over to them on the tarmac in Kandahar, Afghanistan _ where the
crisis ended _ had headed for Quetta, Pakistan, he said. To back up
that assertion, he cited remarks attributed to an official in the
Taliban, which rules most of Afghanistan, in a Pakistani newspaper.


But when he was asked directly if he believed the government of
Pakistan had sponsored the terrorists, Singh said, ``I'll not
comment authoritatively on that.''


While Singh did not make public any evidence to support his
charges, his remarks made it clear that the ill will between the
neighboring nuclear-armed nations is unabated since they clashed
this summer over Kashmir, the Himalayan territory that each seeks
for its own.


The hijacking has become one more episode to aggravate feelings
between the two countries.


The masked hijackers, who never revealed their names,
nationalities or faces, told the hostages that they were Muslims
who sought independence from Indian rule for predominantly Muslim
Kashmir.


Now that the hostages, most of them Indians, are heading home,
attention has shifted to where they have really gone.


The Taliban gave them 10 hours to get out of Afghanistan after
the hijacking ended on Friday.


When they came down the ladder from the Airbus, they and the
three released militants got into a four-wheel-drive vehicle and
drove away. The drive to Pakistan from Kandahar is about five
hours, and it is 12 to 14 hours to the Iranian border.


Singh said the men had headed to Pakistan, and he may well be
right. But the Pakistani government said it did not want them to
enter.


Brig. Rashid Qureshi, spokesman for the military government in
Pakistan, said Saturday that the Taliban had never sought
permission from Pakistan for the hijackers to go to Pakistan, nor
would it have been given.


``If you heard the statement yesterday from our minister of
foreign affairs, we have said that Pakistan is greatly relieved
that the hijacking has ended without bloodshed,'' he said, ``and he
emphasized that the punishment for hijackers here in Pakistan is
capital punishment. I do not expect that after such a statement had
been issued that the hijackers would risk coming to Pakistan.''


He also said that Pakistan had increased its border patrols in
recent months but has made no special provisions to stop the
hijackers. ``I don't expect it is very easy for the hijackers to
come across the border, but while I say this, I have to add that we
cannot patrol every inch of the border,'' he said.


(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


While Singh pointed to the Taliban's information minister as
having said that the hijackers were headed to Quetta, Mullah
Muhammad Omar, the Taliban's supreme leader, told the newspaper New
in Pakistan that they were likely to go to Kashmir.


``We have refused them political asylum,'' he said. ``As they
claim to be Kashmiris, they could go back to Kashmir.


``As the hijackers were masked and are unknown, they may be able
to disappear without being detected,'' he said.


Indeed, the men may be difficult to trace. Border crossings
between Afghanistan and Pakistan are loosely patrolled, with a sea
of humanity crossing the rutted roads in both directions largely
unimpeded. The crossings are traffic jams of trucks, donkey carts
and men carrying huge loads on their backs.


Almost everyone is bearded and wearing the traditional salwar
kameez pants and tunic and a turban. In the winter, as the winds
sweep in off the stark mountains, most men cover their heads and
faces with blankets and scarves, making the task of detecting
hijackers that much more difficult.


Singh said that India was convinced that the hijackers are
headed to Pakistan.


Asked if India would seek the men's extradition, Singh said,
``We will be taking it up with Pakistan in the appropriate fashion
and at the appropriate time.''

