
Do you eat human flesh?


No, it is not a very polite question. But perhaps the horror it
arouses reflects a guilty desire, some dark instinct buried in the
atavistic limbo of the mind, to crush one's enemy, savor his flesh
and absorb his qualities.


Cannibalism has been in the news as rival experts try to get
this bizarre but revealing topic into focus. The issue is whether
cannibalism was once a routine part of human social behavior or is
merely a myth designed to justify advanced nations' domination over
primitive and allegedly anthropophagous peoples.


Of course the survivors of desperate expeditions will sometimes
resort to eating their companions if no other food is available.
The companions, one hopes, died of natural causes, though this
cannot always be assumed. ``Oh, I am a cook and a captain bold, And
the mate of the Nancy brig, And a bo'sun tight, and a midshipmite,
And the crew of the captain's gig,'' the sole survivor laments of
his consumed shipmates in W.S. Gilbert's ``Yarn of the Nancy
Bell.''


This consumption in extremis is known as survival cannibalism, a
practice that is not in doubt. The debate concerns the practice of
ritual cannibalism, like the headhunting of enemies, the Aztecs'
sacrifice of war captives or the eating of dead relatives as part
of beliefs about recycling and regeneration.


Human myth and folklore are shot through with man-eating ogres
and cyclopes. The central sacrament of Christianity is the symbolic
eating of transubstantiated flesh and blood. It is hard not to
suspect a lot of anthropophagy in the closet of the human past. But
the modern reporting of cannibalism has been beset by a bout of
extreme revisionism.


In a 1979 book, ``The Man-Eating Myth: Anthropology and
Anthropophagy,'' Dr. William Arens of the State University of New
York at Stony Brook dismissed as circumstantial and unconvincing
all reports of ritual cannibalism. Arens even challenged the widely
accepted finding that kuru, a human form of mad cow disease seen
among the Fore people of Papua New Guinea, was spread by the eating
of human brains.


Arens' position has influenced anthropologists who believe
primitive peoples were often maligned by missionaries and others
intent upon their moral improvement. ``There is no reliable
evidence to support the claim that Australian Aboriginal societies
engaged in institutionalized cannibalism,'' writes Michael
Pickering, of the Museum of Victoria in Australia, in ``The
Anthropology of Cannibalism'' (Bergin &AMP; Garvey, 1999).


This tide of skepticism doubtless washed away many fanciful
accounts but has been dismaying for archaeologists who found their
evidence for cannibal feasts summarily dismissed. Cracked and
burned human bones have been turned up for decades in Anasazi ruins
in the American Southwest. Despite suggestions first made a century
ago that these might represent cannibalism or ritual sacrifice, the
remains were delicately referred to as ``mass burials.''


The leading advocate of Anasazi cannibalism is Dr. Christy
Turner of Arizona State University. He met only disbelief when he
proposed in 1970 that the cut, burned and defleshed bones of 30
American Indians in Polacca Wash in Arizona were the remains of an
ancient cannibal repast. ``In the 1960s, the new paradigm about
Indians was that they were all peaceful and happy. So, to find
something like this was the antithesis of the new way we were
supposed to be thinking about Indians,'' Turner told Science
magazine in 1997.


Critics attributed the cuts on the grisly remains like these to
animal scavengers, funerary practices, the roof falling in _
anything but anthropophagy. After 30 years of work and the study of
15,000 skeletons, Turner is now convinced that cannibalism was
practiced by the Anasazi as a method of social control. The
cannibals' base of operations seems to have been the great house in
Chaco Canyon, N.M., from which they terrorized people within a
100-mile radius between 900 and 1700 AD.


Turner's findings have been supported by a paleoanthropologist,
Dr. Tim White of the University of California at Berkeley, who from
human bones at an Anasazi site dated to 1150 A.D. noted the macabre
phenomenon of ``pot polish.'' The tips of the bones had shiny
patches, as if rubbed smooth against the walls of a cooking pot.
White showed that deer bones cooked in an Anasazi pot acquired the
same polish marks.


Cannibalism is sometimes said to be a phenomenon of the
agricultural revolution of 10,000 years ago, after which human
populations first became quite numerous. But a clear case of
cannibalism was reported last October among Neanderthals who lived
100,000 years ago by the Rhone river in southern France.


From a cave, French archaeologists recovered 78 pieces of bone
that seemed to belong to about six people. Cuts on the skulls show
the chewing muscles were stripped off and, in one case, the tongue
cut out. The leg bones were broken to remove the marrow. As no
other human species inhabited Europe at the time, this is the
strongest evidence that the Neanderthals, close human relatives who
became extinct 30,000 years ago, practiced cannibalism.


Even now, this horrid propensity for human flesh lies not so
deep beneath the surface. After World War II, a Japanese nurse was
found guilty of having participated in eating the liver of a U.S.
airman executed at Kyushu University, writes historian John Dower
in his new book ``Embracing Defeat.'' Emperor Jean-Bedel Bokassa I
of the Central African Republic possessed an oversized refrigerator
and oven, which his accusers said were used for the culinary
preparation of his countrymen. And Americans have Jeffrey Dahmer.


Even in Western Europe, that cradle of civilization, consider
the strange use of food names for former adversaries. The French,
for example, call the English les bifteks (beefsteaks), while the
English sometimes refer to the French as frogs (for frog legs) and
the Germans as krauts (cabbage). These jocular epithets are
doubtless anthropophagous echoes of a forbidden taste from our
Paleolithic heritage.


Do you eat human flesh? Of course not. But not so long ago, your
ancestors did.

