
High above the sparkling blue sweep of the Bay of Algiers, with
panoramic views over whitewashed colonial palaces and palm-treed
gardens that still make the city one of the jewels of the
Mediterranean, there is a magnificent hostelry.


Once a palace, it became, at the height of France's 130 years of
colonial rule in Algeria, the St. George's Hotel. On an upper
floor, with a balcony scented in the springtime with mimosa
blossoms, there is a suite with a brass plaque at the door
recording the fact that General Dwight D. Eisenhower occupied the
suite for several months in 1942 and 1943, when U.S. and allied
troops were pushing German forces eastward along the north African
coast during World War II. Everyone knew, in that dark winter, the
strategic importance of Algeria.


But that moment, during the climactic war of the 20th century,
may have been the last time the American public really focused its
attention on Algeria. Today, amid fears of a new kind of warfare _
far less intense but nonetheless frightening _ Algeria is once
again thrusting itself onto America's consciousness, now that
figures linked to its Islamic underground have been arrested while
seemingly intent on bringing their terrorist war into the United
States.


It is, of course, an utterly different Algeria. Today, the St.
George's is the El-Djazair Hotel, state-owned like much else in
independent Algeria, its lobby re-done in the over-marbled,
socialist-modern style familiar from visits to communist Eastern
Europe. The armchairs by the front door are occupied 24 hours a day
by the slim-hipped, chain-smoking watchdogs of the Algerian
security police, without whose guardianship no trip outside the
hotel by foreigners is allowed.


Americans hardly ever come. They have been warned off by nearly
40 years of military-dominated government since independence, by
socialist economic policies that have all but wrecked the economy,
and above all by an eight-year civil war. The conflict has been one
of the most savage anywhere since Algeria's previous conflict, the
one from 1954 to 1962 in which the French colonial army fought
fruitlessly to stave off independence. About a million people died
in that earlier fighting, and so far about 100,000 have died in the
current carnage. Many of the new victims have died at the hands of
a shadowy guerrilla movement known, by its French initials, as the
GIA _ the Armed Islamic Group.


If a visitor wants to know something about the GIA, or about the
wider conflict in which it has been fighting for an extreme form of
Islamic rule, there are few better places to venture than up the
hill from the El-Djazair, to one of the grandest U.S. embassies
anywhere, set in breathtakingly lovely grounds.


Here, amid graceful inner courtyards and arches, U.S. diplomats
have a command of the political and economic miseries beyond the
embassy's high walls. The view is all the more impressive for the
fact that the Algerian security police, and the State Department's
own rules, make venturing out of the compound about as easy as
heading out from a cavalry fort in Indian country. The current
ambassador, Cameron Hume, a man of formidable charm and intellect,
has defied the security rules to travel about more than most
ambassadors, but even he would not exactly claim to be a denizen of
the place.


All of which may go some way to explain why, two weeks ago, many
Americans were puzzled to learn that an Algerian man had been
arrested while driving off a car ferry from Canada at Port Angeles,
Wash., with, U.S. customs officials allege, enough bomb-making
material in the trunk of his car to blow up almost any building.
Suddenly there were headlines across America about Ahmed Ressam and
the wider terrorist threat he has been thought to represent. But
what of the country he hails from, and why might he have wanted to
bomb a target in the United States? Above all, what is it that
Americans must now begin to understand about Algeria?


The plain fact is that Algeria, however distant it has grown to
Americans since it made headlines for them during World War II,
remains of enormous strategic importance.


Not only is it the largest country on the African continent, in
terms of area; it also has vast oil and gas reserves that have kept
American oilmen barracked at remote sites in the Sahara desert for
30 years or more. Today, they are in fact the most numerous
Americans in Algeria, even if for the most part they pass swiftly
through Algiers and the other major cities, and have little contact
with the larger society.


(MORE)


nn

