
After independence came to both nations in 1962, the
polarization in both only increased with round after round of
ethnic slaughters. People were killed merely for belonging to one
ethnic group or the other, something that had never happened in
either country.


In Rwanda, that cycle came to a crisis under the presidency of
Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu whose administration demonized all
Tutsi as supporters of rebels fighting to oust him. His death in a
plane crash in April 1994, in which the Burundian president also
died, set off the 100 days of slaughter of Tutsis.


Now the problems continue with the war in Congo and the
seemingly intractable battles between the Hutu rebels and Tutsi
leadership in Burundi. There is not a great deal of hope among most
experts that the problems will be settled soon.


``It seems to me that we are now in a situation where fear has
become the most powerful spur to violence,'' Ms. Des Forges said.


Still, these experts believe there is room for the outside world
to become engaged. The ideal for beginning to rebuild trust, Ms.
Des Forges said, is that outside nations find a way to guarantee
that there will be no more ethnic slaughters in either country For
Rwanda, she added, the international community could show
evenhandedness not only by continuing to bring the Hutu killers to
justice but by not ignoring abuses committed by the Tutsi leaders.


In Burundi, Jan van Eck, a consultant with the Center for
Conflict Resolution in Cape Town, said that each party must have a
place at the negotiating table _ an approach that seems to have
been adopted by the new mediator to the conflict, Nelson Mandela,
who has some experience as a uniting force in his own country,
South Africa.


Oddly, van Eck pointed out, the amount of blood already spilled
may at this point become an argument for ending the violence. In
Burundi, for example, so many people have blood on their hands _
Hutu and Tutsi alike _ that their own mutually awful pasts may
offer an opening for starting anew. ``They always said: Hang all
the people who committed crimes, or shoot them,'' van Eck said.
``But now there is a realization that there might be too many.''

(nk)
	FOR SUNDAY AMs
	Here are today's top news stories from The New York Times News
Service for AMs of Sunday, Jan. 2, 2000:
	Millennium and Y2K Package:
	Y2K-WHAT-PROBLEM? (Undated) _ Now that the year 2000 has arrived
around the world without significant disruptions of power,
transportation, commerce, and other activities dependent on
computers, the question arises: Was the problem overstated, or was
it all those hundreds of billions of dollars that were spent to fix
things that prevented a catastrophe? By Barnaby J. Feder and Andrew
C. Revkin.
	HYPE-MILLENNIUM (New York) _ Before the countdown, the
cork-popping, the confetti and the computer worries _ indeed, long
before most people had personal computers _ there was anticipation.
And no one did more anticipating than Edward L. Woodyard, a
screenwriter who made his reservations for New Year's Eve 1999 in
1984, when the hotel in Times Square where he finally did his
celebrating on Friday night was a half-finished skeleton of steel
and concrete. By James Barron
	WHITEHOUSE-MILLENNIUM (Washington) _ Despite the beluga and the
rack of lamb, Elizabeth Taylor in a pink boa and Lara Flynn Boyle
nuzzling Jack Nicholson at a table near the back of the East Room,
the White House Millennium supper seemed oddly like a business
dinner. As arriving guests _ some 360 artists, scientists and
fund-raisers, along with major donors, loyal senators and favorite
employees _ filed past reporters in the entryway of the White
House, more than a few took the opportunity to plug some project or
product. By Melinda Henneberger.
	INTERNET-MILLENNIUM (Undated) _ By the time midnight struck in
Maui, even the Internet's most dedicated harbingers of millennium
doom had to concede that things had turned out better than they had
expected. ``Does anyone still think TEOTWAWKI will happen??'' typed
one presumably sleep-deprived Y2K watcher, using the favorite chat
room shorthand for ``the end of the world as we know it.'' Her
virtual comrades on Timebomb2000.com were remarkably silent. By Amy
Harmon.
	Y2K-KOSKINEN (Washington) _ It was three hours before midnight
on Friday and John A. Koskinen did not appear worried a bit. His
head was back. His eyes were closed. And a flight attendant aboard
the last Delta Shuttle flight of 1999 from New York to Washington
was urging him, to no avail, to put his seat back into the upright
position. It was three hours before midnight and the federal
government's Year 2000 coordinator, President Clinton's point man
on the potentially debilitating computer glitch, was fast asleep.
By Marc Lacey.
	BRITAIN-MILLENIUM (London) _ The scene at Britain's millennial
dome as the New Year came in. By Sarah Lyall.
	MEXICO-MILLENNIUM (Teotihuacan, Mexico) _ What does the turning
of a millennium mean for a place that has had a continuous history
for thousands of years and where the calendar was invented? By
Julia Preston.
	CUBA-FIDEL-ANNIVERSARY (Havana) _ For Cubans, Saturday is not
only the start of a new year and a new millennium, it is also the
anniversary of Fidel Castro's revolution. By David Gonzalez.
	POPE-MILLENNIUM (Rome) _ John Paul II blessed 35,000 runners who
participated in a marathon for peace Saturday morning after warming
them up with a New Year's Day message dedicated to that theme. By
Alessandra Stanley.
	U.S.-MEXICO-MILLENNIUM (Laredo, Texas) _ In a vivid reminder
that many people along the Texas-Mexico border regard the region as
one country instead of two, the mayors of Laredo and its Mexican
sister city, Nuevo Laredo, walked across one of the bridges above
the Rio Grande and celebrated the new millennium with an
international hug and a kiss. The meeting was freighted with
symbolism for this isolated border region where culture and
nationality seem as blurred and fluid as the Rio Grande itself. By
Jim Yardley.
	MAINE-MILLENNIUM (Lubec, Maine) _ It feels a bit silly to report
that yes, indeed, the sun came up here today. But this was no
ordinary dawn. Set on the easternmost point in the continental
United States, the candy-cane-striped light house at West Quoddy
Head here attracted nearly 500 people so eager to greet the new
millennium Saturday morning that they wanted to be sure to catch
the very first rays of its first American day. It was not to be. By
Carey Goldberg.
	SMALLTOWN-MILLENNIUM (Sycamore, Ill.) _ In this small town on
the frozen Midwestern prairie, people marked the passing of the
1900s in gentle, personal ways. At midnight, children scampered to
front porches, shouting in high-pitched voices and banging pots and
pans in a noisy, homespun welcome of the new year. For many, the
promise of 2000 came like a glistening gift. ``It's a wonderful
time,'' said John Garman, 62. ``There is peace on earth.'' By Dirk
Johnson.
	HOLLYWOOD-MILLENNIUM (Hollywood) _ With flashing strobe lights,
hovering helicopters, and a typically atomized approach, Los
Angeles said goodbye to the 20th century Saturday morning in a
celebration that fell short of its own aims, dampened by rain and
by Southern California's seeming inability to get too awfully
excited about anything. By Todd S. Purdum.
	HAWAII-MILLENNIUM (Honolulu) _ All over the island, noise. The
fireworks were not supposed to start before 9 p.m. Yet by then, the
cacophony was such that conversations had to be shouted or mimed or
postponed. Tourists were flabbergasted. ``It sounds like an air
war,'' said Elizabeth Williams, who could not help holding her
fingers in her ears. ``A person could go deaf after this.'' By
Evelyn Nieves.
	INTERNATIONAL
	(Coded i)
	RUSSIA-YELTSIN (Moscow) _ On his first full day as Russia's new
acting president, Vladimir Putin left before dawn to visit with
Russian troops fighting in Chechnya, handing out hunting knives as
presidential souvenirs. Besides offering the nation a new image of
an active, concerned leader, the visit reflected Putin's close
association with the Chechnya battle. By Celestine Bohlen.
	RUSSIA-ASSESS (Moscow) _ If Vladimir Putin's visit last week to
the federal Railways Ministry is any indication, Russia may be in
for an interesting trip indeed. As the Moscow daily Kommersant
reported, Putin, in icy tone, asked why the railroads beseech the
Kremlin for money when certain customers got special shipping
discounts. The extraordinary scene suggests there is more than one
way to look at Putin's pledge to restore a strong central
government to Russia. By Michael Wines.
	INDIA-HIJACK (New Delhi, India) _ The 161 hostages who were
freed on Friday from a hijacked Indian Airlines jet savored the
simple pleasures that had been denied them for the past week: a
shower, a fresh shave, sleeping with their legs outstretched and
eating a home-cooked meal. By Barry Bearak.
	With a map.
	PAKISTAN-SERIAL-KILLER (Lahore, Pakistan) _ The man who says he
killed 100 youths in Pakistan out of revenge for a beating he
received turned himself in after a month of hiding. By Barry
Bearak.
	BRAZIL-MILITARY (Rio de Janeiro) _ How nationalist elements are
resisting the downsizing of the military being brought on by
globalization. By Larry Rohter.
	CHINA-CATS (Beijing) _ In the homeland of Cantonese food, the
southern province of Guangdong, a small minority of diners like to
order cat. So along with the spread of Cantonese-style restaurants
in Beijing in the last few years has come a new problem:
cat-nabbing, to supply meat for demanding customers. By Erik
Eckholm.
	KYRGYZSTAN-EPIC (Osh, Kyrgystan) _ On most days, 11-year-old
Azamat Malikov spends at least an hour or two doing what comes
naturally to many people in Kyrgyzstan. He works at memorizing what
is said to be the world's longest epic poem _ a work that binds the
Kyrgyz people together, allowing them, many believe, to survive
while other Asian peoples have vanished into history. By Stephen
Kinzer.
	With a map.
	NATIONAL
	(Coded a)
	COLUMBUS-ARCHITECTURE (Columbus, Ind.) _ Unusual architecture
puts a small town on the map of historic places. By Robyn Meredith.
	MAINE-MARIJUANA (Undated) _ When voters in Maine went to the
polls in November and endorsed the use of marijuana as a medicine,
it was more than a victory for cancer patients and others who say
marijuana will help relieve their pain. For a small coalition of
libertarians, liberals, humanitarians and hedonists, the vote was
another step forward in a low-profile but sophisticated crusade to
end the nation's criminal laws against marijuana and other
psychoactive drugs. By Christopher S. Wren.
	AT-HOME-DADS (Des Plaines, Ill.) _ About 85 men from 20 states
attended a recent At-Home Dads Convention here, attending seminars
that featured topics like ``At-Home Daddying ... What Are Our
Issues?'' and ``The Anatomy of a Working Mom's Brain.'' No longer
the butt of demeaning ``Mr. Mom'' jokes, these men have ``come out
of the pantry,'' some of them like to say, with a newly emboldened
attitude, in a men's movement with a new idea of masculinity. By
Rick Marin.
	POLITICS
	(Coded p)
	CAMPAIGN-PROCESS (Washington) _ The United States enters its
54th presidential election year in a period of remarkable calm and
great economic prosperity, with dozens of other nations struggling
to adapt American political forms. Yet the American people question
their political system on one front after another. By Adam Clymer.
	CAMPAIGN-2000 (Washington) _ For the first time since 1960, both
political parties are seeing competitive races for their
nominations. A big overview that looks ahead to the primaries
between now and the end of March. By Richard Berke. Eds: Final
installment of the State of the Campaign series.
	With a graphic.
	COLUMNS
	(Coded k)
	DOWD-COLUMN (Washington) _ Commentary by Maureen Dowd: The
talented Ms. Lewinsky.
	KRUGMAN-COLUMN (Cambridge, Mass.) _ Commentary by Paul Krugman:
Globalism's second chance.
	MOVING LATER:
	AM-FRONTPAGE-NYT _ A description of the front page layout of the
first edition of The New York Times will move at 1 p.m.
	QUESTIONS OR RERUNS: (888) 346-9867 or (212) 556-1927:
	The day supervisor is Ned Kilkelly.
	The evening supervisor is Henry Warnken.
	PHOTOS AND GRAPHICS:
	Phone: (888) 603-1036
	TECHNICAL PROBLEMS: Peter Trigg
	Phone: (212) 499-3332.
	Pager: (800) 946-4645 (PIN 599-4539).
	E-mail: triggp(at)nytimes.com.
	NEW YORK TIMES PARTNERS:
	Please note that your New York Times News Service report
includes news and features from The Arizona Republic, The Boston
Globe, Cox News Service, The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, Hearst
Newspapers, The Houston Chronicle, The Kansas City Star, The Los
Angeles Daily News, The San Francisco Chronicle, The Seattle
Post-Intelligencer, States News Service and the New York Times
Regional Newspapers.
