
In a rainbow blizzard of confetti and a symphony of
neon and fire- works, a mighty crush of New Year's merrymakers
welcomed the year 2000 in Times Square, the world's most famous
intersection.


Undeterred by fears of terrorism or Y2K havoc, the Times Square
crowd showed every sign of being the biggest and noisiest ever,
bent on watching history happen, watching themselves on huge video
screens and hoping that friends and relatives were watching them on
television at home.


After the ball atop 1 Times Square dropped at midnight, a
jubilant May- or Rudolph Giuliani admitted that he had been nervous
about the threat of terrorism or Y2K upheaval ``right until the
last minute.'' But the day's festivities had gone without a hitch.


``I am so proud of all the people of New York City,'' he said.
``I am so proud of the most diverse city in the world. We can have
a great celebra- tion and we can do it peacefully and decently.''


As the revelers whooped and hol- lered, hugged and kissed, one
couple made the ultimate hopeful statement about the new
millennium. At the stroke of midnight, Alex Buxton asked Sicely
Schiffgen to marry him, with what looked like a four-carat diamond
and platinum ring.


The most die-hard of the revelers arrived a day ahead of
schedule, camping overnight in soggy cardboard huts and sleeping
bags, unmolested by battalions of police officers, in order to
stake out prime viewing spots for the party to end all parties.


They won the bragging rights for being in Times Square at 7 in
the morning, when the year 2000 arrived in the islands of the South
Pacific, 17 time zones away. At that moment, as sani- tation
workers tried to haul away remains of the soggy campsites, the
83,000-watt Waterford crystal ball was hoisted to the top of its
tower to the strains of Copland's ``Fanfare for the Common Man.''


Tamar Stratyevskaya, 23, could have used a hot shower by then.
She had spent the night in a makeshift village of cardboard
lean-tos, just the sort of encampment mayors from coast to coast
have been trying to dismantle. She had brought soda, cookies,
noisemakers, a bottle of contraband Champagne and a quilt. When the
rain started, she moved under a movie marquee.


``Everyone I know thought I was crazy,'' said Ms. Stratyevskaya,
a resident of Washington Heights in upper Manhattan. ``But
actually, it's kind of fun.''


Other less compulsive celebrants came in waves throughout the
day: families who wanted a taste of the excitement before
nightfall, when Times Square can become a rowdy place; immigrants
eager to ring in the New Year twice, once along with their homeland
and once in their new home; and tourists and New Yorkers alike who
wedged themselves into spectator pens set up by the police to await
the midnight saturnalia.


As always, the college crowd, do- ing a cold-weather imitation
of spring break in Fort Lauderdale, grew wild and crazy _ or wilder
and crazier _ as the witching hour ap- proached. Mugging for the
television cameras, throwing each other in the air as if in a mosh
pit, smelling suspiciously like contraband alcohol and marijuana,
they tirelessly wel- comed another year of hijinks.


Kamran Syed, a 19-year-old stu- dent at the University of
Southern California film school, had flown from Los Angeles by
himself to see the ball drop. ``Hoo wah!,'' he shout- ed, noting
that he had just downed three Bombay Sapphire martinis and had been
awake for 31 hours. I'm


Carlos Reina, another solo travel- er, who drove all the way
from north- ern Mexico, also had had too much to drink, too little
to eat and not enough sleep. ``I hope I die here,'' he said,
swilling beer. `I'm so happy.''


But not all the party animals were men. Three United Airlines
stewar-H desses were as close to the ball as a spectator could get,
near the Armed Forces recruiting station on the nar- row traffic
island at 43rd Street sepa- rating Seventh Avenue and Broad- way.


``I'm cute, that's all you need to know,'' said Nancy Lewis, 25,
of San Diego.``I flirted my way past the police. That's how I got
here.''


In years past, the rowdy count- down to midnight was the soul of
the Times Square celebration. But for the year 2000 celebration,
led by the Times Square Business Improve- ment District, and
consonant with the transformation of this once- squalid triangle, a
family-friendly daylong celebration was planned.


Two years in the making, with all the special effects of a
Disney movie and the bravura of a Broadway play, Times Square 2000,
as it was called, was an hour-by-hour, time zone-by- time zone
evocation of the cultures of each region of the world.


That made it possible for people who would never venture to
Times Square on New Year's Eve to sample the historic party.


Erin Rogers and Troy Blakely, sweethearts living in New York for
less than a year, ventured forth from their East Side apartment
shortly before noon, the New Year in Indonesia, for a quick peek.
``We came to see it before it got crazy,'' said Ms. Rogers, a
special education teacher. ``It was a fun feeling. And someday we
can tell people we were there at 12.''


Another New Yorker with an appetite only for a glimpse was Diane
Keller, a social worker, who had a simple game plan. She would stay
long enough to shoot one roll of film, for posterity, and then head
for the sales at Lord &AMP; Taylor. ``I wouldn't be here at night, no
way,'' Ms. Keller said. ``I'll be home in front of my fireplace.''


Rosalia Aragon, with her 10-year-old son and several colleagues
from work, zipped in and out of Times Square in under two hours,
watching the New Year arrive in Southeast Asia. Then they all took
the train back to New Jersey for quiet celebrations at home.


Mrs. Aragon kept the trip a secret from her mother, who thought
it was dangerous. One of her co-workers, Ed Czekaj, came despite
the objections of his wife, who hates crowds.


``But this way we got both worlds,'' Czekaj said. ``Boom, boom,
just to say we were here, and then back to our families.''


Mrs. Aragon would have liked to see her home country, Mexico,
usher in the New Year, but that would not come until after
midnight. Kazutaka Noma and his family were luckier _ they were
able to celebrate at 10 a.m., just as his parents were popping
champagne in Japan. A hail of pink confetti, meant to resemble
cherry blossoms, rained down on Noma, a graduate student, his wife
and their 10-year-old son.


(MORE)


nn

