
``We choose freedom because it gives us the power to live,
learn, and love,'' wrote students from Tanapag Elementary School in
the Northern Mariana Islands. Their essay, along with Ray Charles'
sunglasses, photos of Earth from space, a Twinkie, Corningware, a
computer chip, the Bill of Rights, a World War II helmet, a cell
phone and a piece of the Berlin Wall will be among the items sealed
this summer in the National Millennium Time Capsule until 2100.


The time capsule prototype was unveiled Friday by President
Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton in Washington.


It is on display at the Smithsonian Institution's National
Museum of American History. The prototype stands 4 feet high, 6
feet long, 2 feet deep, carved out of wood in an American flag
motif.


``We developed 25 different designs, all shapes,'' said Jim
Biber, an architect from Pentagram who collaborated with Robert
Brunner, an industrial engineer, to design the piece. ``But the
flag was chosen because it is an obvious symbol of the nation.''


The official chest will be fabricated in three metals. The white
strips will be formed in stainless steel, embodying America's
industrial past; the red strips will be formed in silicon bronze,
symbolizing communication, and blue stars will be crafted out of
titanium, a metal with space-age properties, representing America's
future.


The items were solicited by the White House Millennium Council
from almost 400 congressional and presidential medalists and 56
recipients of the National Teacher of the Year award. James Watson,
director and president of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, submitted
a CD-ROM of the human genome project and said in his accompanying
written explanation that ``it will be biology's most important gift
ever to human society, being the instruction book for human
development and functioning.''


Dr. Henry Louis Gates, director of the W.E.B. Du Bois Institute
for Afro-American Research and W.E.B. Du Bois Professor of the
Humanities at Harvard, sent in another CD-ROM, titled Encarta
Africana. ``At the beginning of the twentieth century,'' he
explained, ``W.E.B. Du Bois announced that the most effective way
to fight anti-black racism would be the publication of a
comprehensive encyclopedia of the black world. . . . Ninety years
later, some 400 scholars finally banded together to produce this
encyclopedia.''


The 85-letter Cherokee alphabet was submitted by Wilma
Mankiller, principal chief of the Cherokee Nation, a winner of the
Medal of Freedom. She called it ``the language that has survived on
this land since time immemorial. It is hope for the future that the
Cherokee language will still be spoken 100 or even 500 years from
now.''


Playwright August Wilson suggested a recording by Bessie Smith
of ``Nobody in Town Can Bake a Sweet Jellyroll Like Mine'' because
the first time he heard the song, ``the universe stuttered and
everything fell to a new place. . . . It was a birth, a baptism, a
resurrection, and a redemption all rolled up into one. . . . The
ideas of self-determination, self-respect, and self-defense . . .
are still very much a part of my life as I sit down and write''


Richard Bell, executive director of Young Audiences, chose ``a
simple drawing or song created by a child. I believe this would
convey our commitment to future generations while at the same time
honoring the cultural legacy that sustains all Americans today.''


The artistic director of the Steppenwolf Theatre Co. and Medal
of Arts winner Martha Lavey submitted ``Grapes of Wrath,'' saying:
``This novel captures a profound and constitutive experience in the
composition of the American psyche and culture. This is a nation
defined by the courage and fortitude of a citizenship seeking a
better, fairer, and more generous life.''


Actor Gregory Peck, among others, suggested ``a reel of a film
showing Neil Armstrong's landing on the Moon.''


The White House Millennium Council plans to use all the objects
submitted. The submissions, or replicas of large items, will
ultimately be placed in smaller stainless steel capsules that can
fit in compartments, and essays will be placed in the lower
drawers.


Former President Gerald R. Ford wrote: ``Amidst all that is new,
however, may we never discard those ancient values _ courage and
compassion, integrity and reverence for things seen and unseen _
that have made America a historic refuge for the world's oppressed.
Our fondest hope for the new millennium is that we realize the
promise, older than the republic itself, of a land without limits,
as generous as it is inclusive.''


More than 1,000 students taught by recipients of the national
teacher of the year award submitted individual and collective
statements.


Lynn Preacher's fourth grade class in Oklahoma made an eagle out
of construction and origami paper, saying the eagle ``represents
our country and has many of the same traits of the U.S. It is
smart, brave, mighty and stands for freedom. . . . In America we
have rights that people do not have in other countries, and we
should be thankful.''


The council has not received all contributions, and will
continue to accept submissions until the official capsule is
completed. Until then, the prototype will remain on display at the
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History. The
actual time capsule is expected to be completed by early summer.
That capsule will be on display in the rotunda at the National
Archives until the end of the year, then be relocated to a more
secure, climate-controlled area for future generations, to open in
100 years.

