
The NHL will establish a European division, and the Rangers,
Devils and Islanders will play road games in Berlin, Helsinki and
Moscow. Pay-per-view television, reasonably priced and accessible
via the Internet, will substantially increase overall revenue.
Teams will share it wisely and so will the players as the league
grows to a healthy 40 franchises by 2025.


Because players will be so big and skilled, teams will play with
either one fewer skater or on a bigger ice surface. In the next few
decades, the league will see many European coaches, several
African-American superstars and at least one female goalie. The
Rangers will move to a bigger Madison Square Garden near the Hudson
River. This building _ and others _ will lessen the frequency and
volume of recorded rock music.


_ JOE LAPOINTE


Soccer


The future of soccer is hard to miss. It comes pouring out of
the networks and the cable channels, via the dish, over the
Internet.


The world's game is already in vogue for millions of Americans,
hyphenated or otherwise. Not relying on newspapers still stuck in
ancient formulae, soccer fans seek out the world's male superstars
where they are vastly available. Fans flick on the tube and marvel
at David Beckham's silky passes for Manchester United. Fans crank
up the Internet and follow the inexplicable burial of Roberto
Baggio at Inter Milan. Fans push a button and there is Rivaldo of
Brazil.


The images on the screen put the domestic Major League Soccer in
refreshing perspective. It is all right to be secondary. The best
American lads must go overseas for the money and the challenge.
They will come back for international tournaments and show what
they have learned. In the meantime, Americans have a new love of
soccer _ Michelle Akers' passion; Gao Hong's flair; Sissi's romps;
Linda Medalen's leadership.


_ GEORGE VECSEY


Tennis


Trying to claim its place as a sport for the masses, tennis
decides to shift the focus away from power, by introducing heavier
balls and slower synthetic surfaces that extend rallies, and by
moving the baselines three feet farther away from the net.


Besides the new rules, the International Tennis Federation will
change the Davis Cup format to a two-week, Olympic-style
competition that will be played at major sports venues.


Prize money for the Grand Slam tournaments will continue to
escalate, with the U.S. Open offering the first $1 million purse to
the men's and women's singles champions. As Wimbledon continues to
resist equal prize money, the Women's Tennis Association will
threaten to boycott Wimbledon.


_ NEIL AMDUR

