
Eddie Jones has rejoined the Charlotte Hornets and
reaffirmed his plans for a quick comeback from an elbow injury.


Jones met with Hornets team physician Glenn Perry and was given
a brace to wear until the torn ligament he suffered after being
fouled by the New York Knicks' Kurt Thomas Dec. 20 heals.


``To be honest with you, I don't want to wear it in the games,''
Jones said. ``But I might have to.''


Jones said as soon as the injury was diagnosed that he planned
on returning in three weeks, not the longest-range prospect of six
weeks. ``Like I told people, it wasn't going to be any longer than
three weeks,'' he said.


Jones will begin noncontact practice drills next week and be
with the team during a five-game road trip. He plans on making his
return Jan. 13 in a home against Chicago.


Ilgauskas' return nearer


Remember Zydrunas Ilgauskas? The Cleveland center hasn't played
since fracturing a bone in his left foot in the fifth game last
season. Now, the Cavs think it's possible that he could return to
practice on Jan. 24, after the Cavs return from a two-week West
Coast trip. Ilgauskas had a series of tests on Monday at the
Cleveland Clinic.


No official word, but general manager Jim Paxson says he
anticipates Ilgauskas being able to resume rehab and light workouts
in an effort to return to practice at the end of the month.


Self-deprecating Gentry


Alvin Gentry's alma mater, Appalachian State, is getting a new
arena, so he took some time to reminisce about the old barn he
played in back in the mid-1970s. ``I took my wife back there three
years ago,'' the Pistons coach said. ``I took her past my high
school (in Shelby, N.C.,) and told her, `That's where the legend
was born.' Then we went to my college gym, and I told her, `And
that's where the legend died.'''


Carter's Olympic campaign


Before Vince Carter scored 35 to lead Toronto past Houston,
Rockets and U.S. Olympic team coach Rudy Tomjanovich was asked
about the second-year player's chances of making the elite squad.
``The best thing Vince could do (to improve his chances) would be
to sit out,'' Tomjanovich said, prompting laughter.


After the game, Tomjanovich wasn't laughing. No dummy, Carter
went over to Tomjanovich to shake his hand. Rod Thorn and Russ
Granik of the NBA make the selections, but Tomjanovich has input.


Dickey who?


When the Bulls were blown out in New Jersey, Dickey Simpkins
came out wearing a jersey with the spelling of his name
``Smipkins.'' He said: ``At first, I thought I was from overseas. I
thought I was a foreign player.''... The Bulls had three assists in
that game for an all-time league low. They're not selfish; they
just can't make layups.... If center Jayson Williams can return and
play effectively after the broken leg he suffered last April in a
collision with Stephon Marbury, the Nets might have enough to make
a push for the eighth playoff spot. But coach Don Casey said
Williams hasn't practiced yet and might be better off if he
postponed his comeback attempt from January to February.


Knicks' millennial woes


The Knicks never are at a loss for distractions and controversy.
In the past week, forward John Wallace has been arrested and spent
a night in jail for driving with a suspended license, and power
forward Kurt Thomas has been suspended for two games and fined for
instigating a fight with the Pacers' Jalen Rose during a Christmas
Day game. Throw in injury problems that reduced their active roster
to nine men and a road loss, and you have a team that still is
struggling. ``It's Y2K,'' guard Chris Childs joked. ``That's what
it is.''


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

