
Who could know?


Oh, they had a hunch when he came out of high school, with lots
of schools chasing him. But he was still more a development for the
new millennium than something you could count on right away.


Which is why his coach chose to redshirt him last year and let
him season from the sideline.


Even when this season started, there was all that talk of
potential. ``We had a plan,'' said his offensive coordinator. ``But
I didn't know how he would play or how he would run. I knew he was
going to make a lot of big plays. I just hoped it would be for us.
I knew the potential was there.''


Which is why even he wasn't sure of what he could do or how
quick he could do it.


``Everything surprised me,'' he said. ``The speed of the
players, winning games, all the attention. Getting here.''


Here is the Sugar Bowl. The time is Tuesday night in the Bowl
Championship Series title game when No. 1 Florida State will meet
No. 2 Virginia Tech.


And the player is Michael Vick, Tech's precocious redshirt
freshman quarterback who is a star so bright that Florida State
coach Bobby Bowden calls him the quarterback of the present and the
future.


``Virginia Tech's single greatest threat is Vick,'' said Bowden,
who must find a way to stop Vick's running, passing, and
improvisation if he wants to complete his first unbeaten season and
win his second national championship. ``That's a starting place.
He's like Peter (Warrick) at wide receiver. When he escapes, it's
illegal. Against Florida, you saw Peter. We put him at quarterback
and Florida had the play stopped. I'm sure their coaches were
applauding. Then he reverses field and scores a touchdown. You
don't coach that. That's what Vick can do. Vick is very much the
same as Charlie Ward. He's as dangerous as Charlie. That's the
quarterback of the future. In a few years, Vicks will be running
around everyone's campus.''


That Vick is running around the Tech campus surprised lots of
people, even Vick _ at first.


``I idolized (former Syracuse QB) Donovan McNabb,'' said Vick,
who whittled his college choices to Syracuse and Tech. ``He was my
idol in high school. That's the only other school I really
considered.''


But Vick, who came out of the talent-laden area of Newport News,
Va., didn't want to be compared to McNabb in the context of
replacing him. ``I wanted to make a name for myself on my own,'' he
said.


At first, that's all anyone knew _ his name. He redshirted last
season in a move planned by coach Frank Beamer, Vick, and his
family.


``I wanted to take a year to get used to college,'' said Vick,
who was virtually handed the starting job during spring practice.


Even when the season started, all Vick was to most people around
the country, and even on the Tech campus, was this kid with
potential who might be something special some time in the future.


``I hoped after the first two games, I would have a feel for
where Michael was,'' said Ricky Bustle, Tech's offensive
coordinator. ``I had a plan for him. Then he misses 30 snaps in his
first game (because of a left leg contusion) and the whole second
game.''


Vick reemerged in the third game against Clemson and hardly
looked like anything special. ``He made some poor decisions,'' said
Bustle. ``He tried to make things happen. He tried to force things
down the field and got picked off three times.''


Vick figured the timeline in his head was right. On-the-job
training this season and maybe something good would happen next
year. The students at Tech didn't seem that excited, either.
``After the first two games, I could walk all over the place and no
one bothered me,'' he said. ``After the Syracuse game, I couldn't
walk around at all.''


The speed of the change has astounded almost everyone. So has
Vick's skill and poise.


``Without him, we're not here,'' says Tech running back Shyrone
Stith, Tech's leading rusher with 1,119 yards and 13 touchdowns.


No one is arguing. It was Vick who brought the Hokies into
scoring range in four quick plays, including one highlight-film
26-yard run in a 22-20 last-second victory over West Virginia. It
was Vick who took apart Miami and Boston College.


``Sometimes, I'll look at a play and say, `How did I do that?'
'' said Vick.


That's the thing about Vick, who passed for 1,840 yards and 12
touchdowns and rushed for 585 yards and eight scores. He embraces
the spotlight.


``All I'm doing is having fun,'' said Vick, who finished third
in the Heisman voting, matching the best finish of any freshman in
Heisman history. ``All of this is amazing. There's no way I
expected this to happen this year. I thought maybe it would be
three or four years down the road.''


Much has been made of his youth. Freshmen don't compete for the
Heisman on an equal basis, and they don't lead their teams to the
national championship game.


Vick laughs, agrees, and says that might be true, but he's here
anyway. ``I'm not a type of player who gets flustered,'' he said.
``It takes a lot to get to me. I love pressure situations. I
haven't gone out and played like a freshman yet and hopefully I
won't.''


Florida State's plan is obviously to make that happen. ``We're
going to do different things,'' said Seminoles defensive
coordinator Mickey Andrews. ``You've got to get him out of his
rhythm. If he ever gets his rhythm, he's a tough kid to keep under
control.''


Beamer says the Seminoles can take their shots the way Miami
did, the way Syracuse did, the way BC did. ``He's got a great poise
about him, a great confidence level about him, and as a result he
has great leadership ability. He's not an ego guy.''


Right now the package is still shiny and new. What happens
Tuesday night could change that.


Or it could make Bowden's prophecy about the Quarterback of the
Future come true.

