
Photo and graphics information and editors' names can be found
at the end of this budget.


THE WEEKEND DUTY EDITORS ARE:


IN ATLANTA: Greg Laudick 404-526-5456.


IN WASHINGTON: Andy Alexander 202-887-8334.


Y2K


Y2K-MAIN _ WASHINGTON _ As the world recovers from millennial
celebrations, we get a clear-eyed assessment of how everyone
survived the threat of a Y2K meltdown and terrorist attacks. Story
will wrap in all major developments. (Geewax, Cox News Service)


RUSSIA-Y2K _ MOSCOW _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Coker, Special to Cox News Service)


ISRAEL-Y2K _ JERUSALEM _ The first day of business of the new
millennium in the Arab world. (Kaplow, Cox News Service)


BRITAIN-Y2K _ LONDON _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Roughton, Cox News Service)


MEXICO-Y2K _ MEXICO CITY _ The first day of the new millennium.
(Contreras, Special to Cox News Service)


CARIBBEAN-Y2K _ ST. CROIX, U.S. Virgin Islands _ A postcard from
the edge: possible first-person account on the first day of the new
millennium. (Williams, Cox News Service)


ITALY-Y2K _ ROME _ The first day of the new millennium, and
coverage of the first papal address for World Peace Day and the
opening of the Holy Door at Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica by Pope
John Paul II. (Freeman, Special to Cox News Service)


NATIONAL


OLYMPICS-FUNDING _ Already threatening to cut off American
corporate dollars that bankroll the Olympics, Congressional critics
now are outraged about the increasing amount of federal funds going
to prepare U.S. cities to host the Games. The government plans to
spend a breathtaking $1.4 billion on the 2002 Salt Lake City Games,
more than twice the $605 million spent on the much larger Atlanta
Olympics in 1996, congressional investigators reported last week.
(Turner Atlanta Journal-Constitution). 30.


COXNET FOCUS PAGE


COXNET FOCUS 0102 CHRISTIANITY FUTURE -- Cox Newspapers'
Christianity at 2000 series concludes with a look at the future of
Christianity, exploring the direction the church seems to be headed
in the next century. (White, Atlanta Journal-Constitution).


EDs: This is the CoxNet Focus page for the week. The layout will
be available Thursday before 2 p.m. EST.


POLITICS


BRADLEY-STYLE _ Something about putting on shorts every night
for years and dribbling a ball before thousands changes the way a
performer reacts in front of crowds. The tension of stage fright,
common among those who act, play the concert piano _ or, in most
cases, run for public office _ is missing. The muscles donit
tighten in the same way and the face assumes a loose, locker-room
quality of disregard for the attention being focused on it. As much
as any of the traditional Democratic initiatives he proposes in his
platform, this low-key demeanor, epitomized by the throat lozenge
tumbling constantly in his mouth during his speeches, distinguishes
former Sen. Bill Bradley out on the stump. (Bradley, Atlanta
Journal-Constitution). MOVED


POLITICAL-NOTES _ Mark Sherman's political notes. (Sherman,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


BUSINESS


STOCK-OPTIONS _ More and more employers are awarding employees
stock options. We'll look at who's getting them and strategies for
making stock options part of your compensation package. (Mallory,
Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


GA-AETNA-PRUDENTIAL _ ATLANTA _ Aetna appears to be on the verge
of getting final approval to acquire Prudential's health care
business in Georgia. But the deal has been overshadowed by
problems. The company is on the verge of being fined for late
payments to doctors and patients. At least one hospital is refusing
to treat patients insured by the company because it says Aetna is
lax in paying its bills. There are also customer service problems
that continue to plague Aetna, and the deal raises the question of
whether service will improve in light of its plans to acquire
Prudential. (Miller, Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


Y2K-RETURNS _ ATLANTA _ If Y2K comes and goes without a blip,
shoppers could ring in the New Year at refund counters. Retailers
that have seen a recent spike in sales of emergency supplies are
expecting a good bit of it to come back if New Year's Eve turns out
to be a non-event. Some retailers, like Sears and Ace Hardware, are
clamping down on customers who bring stuff back. Sears is charging
a 20 percent restocking fee on generators. Some Ace stores won't
take back any emergency supplies. Home Depot has a liberal policy
in general and could see the most refunds. Includes reports from
area stores. (Bond, Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


DOW-2000 _ If you're reading this, congratulations, it means you
survived Y2K. More to the point, it means you can probably look
forward to another good year of economic and stock market growth,
as amazing as that seems. (Walker, Atlanta Journal-Constitution)


COXNET BUDGET INFORMATION FOR SUBSCRIBERS OF THE NYT NEWS
SERVICE


Spot news budgets move daily at 2 p.m. and 6 p.m. Eastern.
Additionally, separate features and commentary budgets move at 10
a.m., and sports and business budgets at 6 p.m. Additional updates
are possible if news developments warrant.


All times are Eastern unless otherwise noted. PLEASE NOTE:
SPORTS STORIES will have an E.T.A. of 9:30 P.M. If news, business
or features stories will move after 8 p.m., an ETA will be given.


PHOTOS, LAYOUTS and GRAPHICS


CoxNet layouts are for sale over the web, through the New York
Times News Service's PageExpress service, at
www.nytsyn.com/syndicate/pageex.


If a budget line or story is marked with photos or graphics,
those are available from the New York Times News Service at
212-556-4204. Or call CoxNet for more information at 404-526-5456.


HOW TO REACH US


Questions should be directed to CoxNet, the Cox News Service, in
Atlanta at 404-526-5456. We are staffed 8 a.m. to 10 p.m.
Monday-Friday, and 1-10 p.m. on weekends and holidays.


The news manager is Paul Foutch, 404-526-5429,
pfoutch(at)coxnews.com.


The day news editor is Tom Oder, 404-526-5887,
toder(at)coxnews.com.


The night news editor is Todd C. Duncan, 404-582-7282,
tduncan(at)coxnews.com.


Cox Washington Bureau:


News editor Art Dalglish, 202-887-8338, artd(at)coxnews.com


Foreign editor Rick Christie, 202-887-8316, rickc(at)coxnews.com


Bureau chief Andy Alexander, 202-887-8334, andya(at)coxnews.com


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

