
Beginnings are always difficult: Even the
most tough-minded writer finds it hard to avoid portentousness. And
since this is a quadruple beginning (new year, new century, new
millennium and, for me, new column), I won't even try. What follows
are some broad opening-night thoughts about the world economy.


I deliberately say world economy, not American economy. Whatever
else they may have been, the '90s were the decade of globalization.
Both the bad news (it was a banner decade for financial crises) and
the good (living standards in much of the world continued to rise,
in some cases _ like China _ spectacularly) were closely tied to
the ever-increasing integration of national economies with each
other, to the seemingly unstoppable logic of growing trade and
investment.


Or is it unstoppable? You see, we've been here before.


Historians sometimes call it the First Global Economy: the era
from the mid-19th century onward in which new technologies of
transportation and communication made large-scale international
trade and investment possible for the first time.


In their quest to create that global economy, to abolish the
traditional constraints of geography, engineers accomplished
miracles _ laying telegraph cables beneath the Atlantic, digging
tunnels through the Alps and building paths between the seas. The
Panama Canal, whose construction required breakthroughs not only in
earth-moving technology but in medical science, was the high-water
mark of the age (literally: the locks raise ships 85 feet above sea
level).


And just as the canal reached completion, the global economy
fell apart.


To some extent, the First Global Economy was a casualty of war.
The Panama Canal and the Western Front both went into action in
August 1914. The war and its indirect consequences _ hyperinflation
and political instability in Germany, isolationism in the United
States, and so on _ partly explain why the forces of globalization
went into a retreat that by 1945 left the world economy thoroughly
Balkanized.


But the truth is that even before 1914, though the volume of
trade and investment continued to expand, the globalist idea was on
the defensive.


Intelligent men might explain that wars were no longer worth
fighting and borders were obsolete; a sophisticated, cosmopolitan
elite _ like the U.S.-educated technocrats who ran Mexico until
they were overthrown in 1911 _ might move freely between
continents; but the political foundations for a global economy were
never properly laid, and at the first serious shock the structure
collapsed.


We are now living in the era of the Second Global Economy _ a
world economy reconstructed, largely under American leadership,
over the past half-century.


It took a long time to put Humpty Dumpty back together again:
The share of world output entering into trade didn't reach its
pre-1914 levels until the 1970s, and large-scale investment in
``emerging markets'' _ that is, places that are to today's world
economy what America was to our great-grandfathers' _ has revived
only in the last decade. But this time the economic achievement is
built on stronger foundations _ isn't it?


Well, yes _ but maybe not strong enough. True, we have gotten
better at making the distinction between commerce and conquest _
trade no longer follows the flag and blatant imperialism is out of
style. (We handed the Panama Canal back last month.) And Western
nations seem to have more or less grown out of the saber-rattling
nationalism that led to catastrophe back in 1914.


But now as then the global idea is very much a minority
persuasion, all too easily portrayed as an ideology of and for a
rootless cosmopolitan elite that is out of touch with ordinary
people.


For that, surely, is the lesson of the trashing of the World
Trade Organization meeting in Seattle last November. Not that the
protesters were right: It is a sad irony that the cause that has
finally awakened the long-dormant American left is that of _ yes! _
denying opportunity to Third World workers.


But though the facts may be on the side of the free traders,
though global trade really ought to have mass public support, one
can hardly deny that the opponents are winning the propaganda war.
For the moment, as long as it seems to deliver the goods and
services, globalization is tolerated; but it is not loved.


The big economic question for the next century, in other words,
is really political: Can the Second Global Economy build a
constituency that reaches beyond the sort of people who congregate
at Davos? If not, it will eventually go the way of the first.

