
The coach is looking for soup in his
kitchen, something warm to take to the couch while he puts up his
feet and watches a nature show and lets his head clear from the
cold he always manages to catch around the holidays. For an hour at
least, until the wives of his assistant coaches arrive for a gift
exchange, Bobby Bowden does not have to be Bobby Bowden, the
kindly, homespun icon of Florida State football.


Instead, he can be tired and 70 years old. He can be free of the
meetings and game films and having to put names with the numbers
and faces of some 80 kids a half a century younger than him.


Forty-eight hours ago, Bowden flew to Dallas and back to visit a
high school recruit. There have been two crisply paced staff
meetings, where the coach consulted his voluminous notes and
tersely told his assistants what they needed to do if Florida State
was going to win a second national title, if, after 34 years and
303 career victories as a head coach, Bowden was going to complete
his first undefeated season by beating Virginia Tech in the Sugar
Bowl on Tuesday.


For four more hours, he has stood alone on a tower above the
practice field and scratched more notes for more terse
instructions. In between, he has signed dozens of footballs and
pictures and answered hundreds of pieces of mail _ even dictating
individual letters to members of a flag football team in Bartlett,
Ill. He has taken two naps on his office couch and dozed off
another time or two while watching game film.


Now at home, the TV drowns out the Christmas carols his wife,
Ann, plays on the compact disc player. The rustle of Bowden's
garnet and gold Seminoles sweat suit precedes him every time he
pops his head around the corner to ask Ann whether the salad is for
him. How about the ham? And which button turns off the music?


``We're like most old people,'' says Ann Bowden, who through 50
years, 6 children and 21 grandchildren has been the coach's wife.
``We've got satellites and all this stuff, but if we push a wrong
button we don't know how to get it to work again. We remember
things 30 years ago, but forget where we put our keys this
morning.''


The coach, indeed, has made concessions to age. He rides a golf
cart to the practice field. He has turned over the play-calling to
his offensive coordinator, Mark Richt. More often than he likes,
Bowden must greet some of his players with a catch-all ``buddy''
when their names don't immediately find their way to the tip of his
tongue.


But one thing that has not dimmed as Bowden squints his way
through the twilight of his coaching career has been his success.
For the third time in four years, Florida State (11-0) is playing
for a national championship. For the 13th consecutive year, his
team will finish in the top four in the national rankings and close
out a season with 10 victories or more.


Bowden dawdles in his kitchen and spends too much time on the
sofa when he is home. When the man who has tried to return
``dadgum'' to the American lexicon, however, crosses his arms,
shuts his eyes and remembers a head coaching career that began in
1955 at South Georgia College, he spits out game scores and
players' names that span three seasons of a career.


``When I first started I had more a big brother relationship
with my team,'' Bowden said. ``Then it evolved into a father-son
thing and now I'm more like a grandfather _ a little more patient
and forgiving. Maybe softer.''


Don't be fooled. Once a 100-yard football field is marked off
and 22 players are on the field, Bowden is as hard-nosed and
precise as the war generals he spends his off hours reading about.


Earlier on Saturday, 45 minutes before practice began, the coach
motored his golf cart to the practice field and parked all alone as
he does every day. It is his sacred quiet time and no one dares to
bother him _ not assistants, not players. In fact, when an errant
punt bounced in his direction and threatened to disturb his peace,
several of those beefy young Seminoles cringed and tried to will
the ball to bounce away from Bowden.


If the icon has gone soft, it has not affected his sense of
order. Though he has cut back his hours and likes to say he now
only ``coaches his coaches,'' when Bowden ascends that steel
platform at the start of each practice, every Seminole assistant,
trainer and player knows who is in command.


Terrell Buckley, the former Seminole defensive back now playing
for the Miami Dolphins, dubbed it the ``Tower Of Power.'' It is
where Seminoles who blew a blocking assignment or botched a pass
route glance furtively, hoping that Bowden was concentrating on
some other part of the field or writing in his notebook. His
assistants do not bother looking; they know Bowden has recorded the
errors.


``You dread getting those notes in the staff meetings in the
morning,'' said Dave Van Halanger, the strength and conditioning
coach who played for Bowden at West Virginia and has been an
assistant at Florida State for 17 years. ``He doesn't miss
anything. You know when it's coming.''


But it is in his office, when a half-chewed cigar is jammed in
his mouth, that Bowden most resembles the great military men he so
admires. He insists on answering every bit of mail. His longtime
assistant, Sue Hall, is constantly taking polite but firm orders
over the intercom as he scribbles his name through a four-foot pile
of mementos.


``He's a tough guy to work for,'' Hall said. ``He wants things
done his way and wants it done now. You don't run something this
big without a certain regimen and pace.''


(MORE)


nn

