
EDS: New top and updates throughout.


By SCOTT MONTGOMERY


c.2000 Cox News Service


WASHINGTON _ Clear skies and a string of flawless midnight New
Year's rollovers around the globe enticed a massive crowd to the
National Mall for a fireworks spectacular ignited by President
Clinton to greet the 21st century.


On a night when Clinton called on America to make its ``dreams
stronger than its memories,'' 2000 arrived in the nation's capital
in a shower of light over the Washington Monument that left
thousands of spectators cheering.


Clinton, speaking from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial with
the Great Emancipator peering over his should, said ``Americans
must not fear change. Instead,'' he said, ``let us welcome it,
embrace it, and create it.''


Although daytime activities in Washington drew modest crowds,
throngs streamed in by nightfall to find grassy seats on the
heavily-secured patch of the Mall.


They choked into long thick lines through a handful of security
checkpoints where revelers submitted to searches. At one point,
crowds on 17th Street waiting to pass through security entrances
pushed over barriers and rushed past police who were helpless to
stop them.


Since last week, officials had been scaling back the size of the
crowd they expected from an original estimate of 500,000. But as
midnight closed in, the streets teemed with people and there seemed
to be little left of the anxiety over terrorist attacks that
prompted the mayor of Seattle last week to cancel a major outdoor
celebration around the city's famed Space Needle.


Washington's three-hour show, with a pricetag of $12 million,
competed on television with the customary Times Square celebration.
While New York's gala featured the traditional ball of light
descending in the seconds before midnight, Washington's had a white
light of fireworks cascading up the 555-foot Washington Monument,
sparked by a fuse racing along the reflecting pool from the Lincoln
Memorial.


Diane Tresca and her husband, Sal, of Rhode Island, left the
friends they were visiting in a Maryland suburb to come down to the
Mall where the gala at the Lincoln Memorial also was shown on large
screen TVs set up on the grass. Their friends wouldn't leave their
house.


``They're too busy holding onto their bottled water,'' Diane
Tresca said.


She said she wasn't concerned about terrorism. ``No,'' she said,
``I'm more concerned about not being able to see the screen.''


In remarks at events throughout the day, Clinton made no mention
of the unease that had settled on Washington in the weeks leading
up to Friday night. Fear of terrorism pegged to year-end
celebrations focused on Washington, New York and Seattle.


``What we celebrate did not begin today, and it will not end
tomorrow,'' Clinton said to a crowd at the Mall earlier in the day.
``There is no better opportunity to open a new chapter of progress
and possibility for all people ... no better time to be a truly
good neighbor to the people of the world who share this smaller and
smaller planet of ours.''


Clinton thanked God ``for this wonderful weather, so we all feel
good being out here. . . The sun is still rising on America.''


As the sunlight faded on the day, the Siegel family of Richmond
played the card game Uno while sitting on the curb waiting, with a
few hundred others, to be let into a fenced off section of the Mall
nearest the Lincoln Memorial.


Actor and musician Will Smith hosted the three-hour stage show
called ``America's Millennium Gala.'' Clinton and other
dignitaries, including former Sen. John Glenn, watched from a
heated booth at the Lincoln Memorial.


Among the performers were actors Robert Duvall and Jack
Nicholson, actress Diane Keaton, and musicians Don McLean, Bobby
McFerrin, Kenny Rogers, Luther Vandross, Kathy Mattea, Trisha
Yearwood, and the 25-member company of the Broadway production
``Stomp.''


The Siegels weren't worried about the dangers of either Y2K
chaos or terrorism. In fact, they joked about the festivities being
hosted by Smith, who has played the hero in a pair of futuristic
space-themed films, ``Men in Black'' and ``Independence Day.''


``We thought since Will Smith is the host and he's killed aliens
and space bugs, you couldn't be in a better-protected zone,'' joked
Dan Siegel, 46, who was there with his wife, Peggy, and children
Julia, 16, and Tommy, 14.


But the potential for danger made it possible to get a hotel
room within walking distance of the Mall just last week. And, in
their one concession to the Y2K bug, the Siegels settled on
Washington as their New Year's celebration destination because they
could make the trip from Richmond and back on a single tank of gas.


``Just in case there's a problem and we can't get any more,''
said Peggy Siegel, also 46.


For Benjamin McKenzie, 29, the trip to the Mall was just a walk.
He lives on Capitol Hill and brought his 15-year-old brother, who's
visiting from upstate New York, down for the fireworks. But he
couldn't get his friends to join in.


``They said 'No way!''' McKenzie said. ``We know security is a
concern, but it's not overwhelming. It feels like a normal day.''


(Scott Montgomery can be reached by e-mail at:
scottm(at)coxnews.com).


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

