
Europeans, it often seems, spent the last
decade building resentments of American fast food, pop culture,
corporate callousness and an unchallenged military machine _ when
they weren't importing or trying to emulate them. They ended the
century thinking they had staked out the parameters of
Americanization and could now concentrate on erecting barricades
around their traditional larders, languages and societies. But some
demographers have a big surprise in store.


Before the new millennium is a few decades old, these
demographers say, Europe will be face to face with an
American-style phenomenon more profoundly unsettling to many of
them than any superficial cultural symbol or business intrusion.


The challenge, these experts say, is this: To survive
economically and socially, Europe may have to lower its bars to
immigration and change its racial and ethnic face through mass
migration of labor from around the world. In other words, it may
find itself debating moves toward a social structure that looks
more like America.


It has often been said that however much they share in
democratic values, Europeans and Americans still differ on one
fundamental: In America, the whole idea of citizenship is that
anyone from anywhere can become naturalized. In Europe, on the
other hand, the idea of citizenship in most places is still linked
to ethnic heritage, or at least to language and culture. True,
Americans have restricted immigration and Europeans have invited
foreign workers to take jobs in their economies. But large-scale
immigration and naturalization is still an American ideal, while
Europeans cling to a linguistic and racial basis for citizenship.


In the coming decades, U.N. experts say, demographics indicate
that many European countries (and Japan) will have more older
people and fewer babies than ever before. This seems to foretell
severely shrunken labor forces and swollen ranks of pensioners. If
Europeans want to keep their economies and social services running,
they will be tempted to look far afield for qualified workers of
all kinds _ not just the semi-skilled or unskilled workers who have
traditionally been invited to fill gaps in their work forces.


Joseph Chamie, the director of the U.N. population division,
says there is a logical response: what he calls replacement
migration. ``These countries in Europe will face the wall,'' he
said. ``They either bring in migrants, or they are going to decline
in size. The model that the United States has _ and Canada and
Australia _ is increasingly becoming attractive to some of the
thinkers in those countries.''


U.N. experts now preparing a report to be published this year
say that their early projections show that Italy would have to add
about 9 million immigrants by 2025 _ about 300,000 a year _ to keep
its population at 1995 levels, Germany would need to import 14
million people _ 500,000 a year _ France 2 million and the European
Union as a whole about 35 million. If the Europeans wanted to keep
their ratio of older people to active workers at the 1995 levels,
the union would need 135 million immigrants by 2025.


Surplus labor, some of it very highly skilled, is waiting in the
third world, and the pressure for migration out of overpopulated
countries will be growing as the European societies shrink. A group
of developing countries is calling for a U.N. conference that would
have the freer movement of labor on its agenda. India, for example,
has a labor force larger than that of the European Union. A lot of
its computer geniuses are already sought by Silicon Valley. Will
Europe soon have to compete for them? And will it let them migrate?


If migration is the answer, and the numbers are large enough,
Europe may well find itself under a challenge to make these and
other immigrants full citizens in every sense. Today, Germany
tolerates Turkish ``guest workers,'' as France allows Algerian
migrants, but in both cases these minorities have become lightning
rods for nationalist resentments.


As always when projections are made, there are dissenting
voices. Michael Teitelbaum, program director of the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation in New York and the co-author with Jay Winter of ``A
Question of Numbers: High Migration, Low Fertility and the Politics
of National Identity'' (Hill and Wang, 1998), points out that some
European countries are already quite culturally and racially
diverse. That aside, he says, he does not believe that large-scale
migration is unavoidable.


``I don't think there is anything inevitable about anything when
it comes to demography, and I am a demographer,'' he said. And, he
said, European nations may not see the American example as worth
emulating.


``It depends on what your goals are,'' he said. ``If your goals
are to maximize your gross domestic product then you probably don't
want a labor force that is slowly declining in numbers, even if
their productivity is rising fast. If your goal is not GDP but GDP
per capita or the equitable distribution of GDP and a kind of
equilibrium, a kind of agreeable quality of life in your society,
then you may not care as much.''


Teitelbaum is saying, in effect, that the challenge may be what
Chamie predicts, but that Europeans may decide the cost of meeting
it is too high. He points to European feelings about American-style
capitalism.


``There are many Europeans who hear Americans say how triumphant
the American economy is and how wonderful and prosperous it is and
they look at it and say, `Gee, we don't want to be like that,'''
Teitelbaum said. ```It's really two societies with the kind of
underclass that's getting worse and worse off, more and more
marginalized.'''


(MORE)


nn

