
It was three hours before midnight on Friday and
John A. Koskinen did not appear worried a bit. His head was back.
His eyes were closed. And a flight attendant aboard the last Delta
Shuttle flight of 1999 from New York to Washington was urging him,
to no avail, to return his seat to the upright position.


``Excuse me, sir,'' the attendant said, pulling at the seat.
``Excuse me.'' It was three hours before midnight and the federal
government's year 2000 coordinator, President Clinton's point man
on the potentially debilitating computer problems, was fast asleep.


That is not to say that Koskinen was not taking the arrival of
the new year seriously, or that he had written off the possibility
of any devastating computer mishaps. ``Some people have said, `Why
does this guy look so relaxed?''' Koskinen said. ``If I had any
worries, they were at the beginning. The last two months, I've
slept well every night.''


Koskinen, a former government budget official and corporate
turnaround expert, had been on the job for more than a year and a
half when the big moment finally arrived. He had held countless
strategy sessions, conference calls, tests, drills, press
briefings, public hearings and closed-door meetings. And even his
brief shut-eye aboard Delta Flight 1769 was work-related. By
catching a quick nap aboard the nearly empty flight, Koskinen was
reassuring the public about the safety of the nation's airlines.


He had arranged his quick trip to La Guardia Airport and back so
he would be in the air at 7 p.m. Eastern time, which was midnight
in the world of aviation, when the air traffic control system
encountered the year 2000.


``Happy New Year,'' he said casually when the big moment
arrived. The 727 he was aboard kept flying. He settled into his
seat. As far as crises go, this one was a snoozer.


The federal government's round-the-clock $50 million command
center had all the hubbub of an insurance office. There were no
officials running around in commando attire. No shouted cries. No
distress.


``It's a pretty sedate atmosphere,'' said one staff member, who
left midway through the night to ring in the new year at home.
``People are making phone calls and making reports, but there's not
much occurring out there.''


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


So aggressive was the information collection effort, though,
that even minor traffic glitches in far-flung places were reported
straight to Washington.


Marion, Ohio, reported that its transportation system had
suffered slowdowns, but the culprit was blowing snow and slick
roads, not wayward computers. Quincy, Mass., noted that traffic was
being rerouted through its downtown because of a New Year's
celebration there. Rock Springs, Wyo., noted on its report that
there is a vacancy for the Red Cross directorship there.


The rumors about what might happen far outshined reality.


There had been the talk among the gloomiest about rioting in the
streets, martial law, an end to society as we know it. Part of
Koskinen's job leading up to the rollover was to calm nerves in
order to prevent runs on banks, hoarding of supplies and other
hysterical behavior.


The Web site set up by the President's Council on Year 2000
Conversion attempted to shoot down rumors before they spread too
far: Elevators were not at risk of free fall. Prison gates would
not swing open. The president, who was busy speechifying when the
second hand reached the top of the clock, had nothing sinister up
his sleeve.


``The president has no intention of declaring martial law for
the Year 2000 transition,'' the Web site advised, even offering
some historical context to back up the point. ``No president has
ever declared a condition of martial law that applied to the entire
country. In fact, not since President Lincoln placed several areas
of the country under martial law during the Civil War has any
president directly proclaimed martial law on behalf of the federal
government.''


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


Government officials warn that year 2000 problems may still crop
up in the days ahead, when businesses open on Monday morning and
the world's computers first begin operating in a year 2000 world.


``It is far too early for us to feel totally satisfied and
declare victory,'' Koskinen said at a briefing early Saturday
morning after the new year had begun in the Central time zone. ``I
think we have three or four more days of careful, close monitoring
before we can truly determine how successful we've been.''


In addition, computer experts point out that the next potential
catastrophe could come on Feb. 29, when computers have to deal with
a leap year. On that date, Koskinen will be back in the command
center _ dressed in a suit and tie, not camouflage _ ready for the
worst.

