
Only a few rays of early-morning sunshine reached the aquamarine
water of Gisborne's waterfront along Poverty Bay. But that was
enough for the ecstatic celebrants who came from around the world
to usher in the new century.


``It was impossible to resist the idea that this would be one of
the first places to see the sun rise,'' said Chris O'Dowd of San
Francisco.


The sunrise _ whether visible or not _ was a big deal Down
Under, where locals maintain that the new year begins not at
midnight, but at dawn. Several islands of the South Pacific
jockeyed heatedly to be considered the first to see the new century
arrive. New Zealand emerged as the apparent winner, and it fell to
Gisborne, which is the most easterly city on the country's North
Island, to show the world that this nation was worthy of the honor.


``We're the first to see the light,'' said lifelong Gisborne
resident Annabell Gibbons, quoting a slogan that appeared on
everything from sidewalk cobblestones to souvenir T-shirts.
``Whether or not we actually see it doesn't matter.''


Not all visitors to New Zealand sought out the crowds. At dawn
Friday, Michael Callan sat on Tokomaru Bay, 40 miles north of the
party in Gisborne, and looked east toward home.


Callan, a Dubliner who left Ireland in June to travel the world,
raised a beer and toasted 2000 as waves crashed ashore. ``I'm not
into huge crowds,'' he said. ``I wanted to be alone with my
thoughts.''


But Gisborne, at any rate, was determined to make the most of
its good fortune. The city spent three years and $2 million
spit-shining itself and planning festivities that included a street
party, ceremonial dances by the native Maori people, a concert by
opera singer Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, and an air show by the nation's
air force.


The party drew far fewer than the 70,000 people city leaders
expected, but an official tally was not readily available. Still,
New Zealand is a small place _ just 3 million people live on the
nation's two largest islands _ and New Year's Eve 1999 was the
biggest event this city of 35,000 has ever seen.


``I haven't seen this many people in Gisborne in all my life,''
said Gwendoleine Taare, who lived here for 30 years before moving
to Auckland, the nation's largest city.


The thought of so many people _ a good number of them very drunk
_ had city leaders planning for the worst. They brought in 200
police officers from the capital city of Wellington to augment
Gisborne's 40 cops. A refrigerator truck was ordered up to handle
any overflow in the morgue, which has room for just three corpses.


Even as Gisborne steeled itself for potential disaster _ someone
thought it necessary to have 200 caskets on hand _ the entire
country prepared for Y2K problems. Being the first to see 1999
become 2000 also meant being the first to see any computer
meltdowns.


``The whole world is watching us'' read a front-page banner
headline on Friday's edition of the New Zealand Herald. But in the
end, nothing happened when the clock at the center of Gisborne,
which for the past 1000 days had been counting down the days, hours
and minutes until 2000 _ struck 12.


``I want to call back home to Canada to tell them that there
aren't any Y2K problems yet,'' said Richard Cloutier, a talk-show
host from Winnipeg.


After the clock struck 12 and the smoke from the fireworks
wafted away from downtown, the crowd gathered along Gisborne's main
street migrated toward the sea to drink, dance and party some more
while awaiting the first sunbeams.


(Correspondent Kristin Bender contributed to this report.)

