
Here we are, in the year 2000, and Don Casey is the coach of a
red-hot team named the New Jersey Nets. Corporate synergy triumphs
again.


Did you know that Casey's team is 10-3 since his new
organizational ally Joe Torre motored over the George Washington
Bridge to spread Yankees stardust over the then-bedraggled, 2-15
Nets? Suddenly, tantalizingly, the Nets are no longer stringing
together defeats, like an order of Spaghetti Calipari.


Stephon Marbury turned into Derek Jeter. Keith Van Horn morphed
into Bernie Williams. The Nets have been sharing, bonding, winning.
And this all apparently began when they waited an hour after
practice one afternoon for a late-arriving Torre, a development
Casey took as a sign that his players were desperate enough to
listen to someone.


Torre came with tales of accountability, of persistence, of
stretching.


``He said that he was lenient with rules but that he wanted guys
out on the field, doing exercises together, but, most of all, not
thinking about their own statistics,'' Casey said after the Nets
won their franchise record ninth straight at home on Thursday over
Orlando.


In case none of this sunk in, Torre took the 62-year-old Casey
aside and told him: ``Remember one thing. Your health comes
first.''


In 1999, Torre himself experienced the best and worst of times,
winning his third World Series in four seasons as the Yankees'
manager, while undergoing treatment for prostate cancer detected
last spring.


All around the metropolitan area, it was a strange and in many
ways torturous year for managers and coaches. In the face of a
win-now frenzy, under attack from outside their organizations and
within, they needed a break. They needed support. They needed each
other.


So Bobby Valentine graciously took it upon himself to drop in on
Jim Fassel on the day Fassel most likely saved his job as coach of
the Giants. Fassel's team had been spinning out of control and
playoff contention. His offense was a mess. His defense was in
chaos. Earlier that week, Michael Strahan had picked a fine time to
criticize Fassel's leadership, while the coach was home in
California, burying his mother.


Enter, Bobby V., spiritual healer, beacon of logic.


In a pregame primer, Valentine told Fassel that at least he
still had his own hand-picked staff. Valentine had to rally the
Mets into the playoffs, save himself, with one eye on the field and
the other on coaches who were forced on him after front-office
meddlers fired his most trusted aides. Valentine survived a
gut-wrenching, late-season slide and had the last laugh, or until
Kenny Rogers sent him home from Atlanta for a postseason cry.


Inspired to better use his assistants while they were still
around to assist, Fassel handed off play-calling chores to Sean
Payton, his first-year quarterback coach. The Giants proceeded to
slaughter Bill Parcells' Jets, the game Fassel had to win. He
salvaged mediocrity from what would have been calamity. With modest
success and some timely luck, by Sunday evening he could still be
smiling his way into the playoffs.


Over at Madison Square Garden, Jeff Van Gundy has reportedly
been asked by superiors to begin exercising his atrophying facial
muscles. For part of 1999, it was not easy being Van Gundy,
typically stuck between a Checketts and a Grunfeld, a Ewing and a
Sprewell. After outlasting his adversary, General Manager Ernie
Grunfeld, Van Gundy saw his job teeter on a Miami rim during the
playoffs. The Knicks went all the way to the championship series.
The Garden president, Dave Checketts, reluctantly gave up his Phil
Jackson fixation and handed Van Gundy a lucrative contract
extension. Why is this man frowning?


Even Parcells, who thought he was going to the Super Bowl until
Vinny Testaverde limped out of this season, laughs off critics who
claim he was unprepared with a seasoned backup. As soon as the
expected purchase of the Jets by the Knicks owner Charles Dolan is
complete, Parcells could well be dispatched to the Garden to teach
his company mate Van Gundy new tricks: how to make players and
reporters heel and roll over.


With all these teams living under one corporate roof, maybe
Parcells will usher in an age of cross-fertilization, take his shot
at the Rangers or the Knicks. He probably thinks he's a better
hockey coach than John Muckler. Poor Muckler. He's been fired in
the newspapers more than Casey. Does anyone remember _ does anyone
even know _ that this man coached Edmonton to the Stanley Cup?


Sorry. The travails of a hockey coach barely register on the
scale of human suffering. The MetroStars relieved their coach, Bora
Milutinovic, but that was probably a favor. The Nets relieved John
Calipari last March, but that was because he drove everyone crazy.


Calipari's 3-17 start was the perfect excuse. Casey, a likable
lifer from South Jersey, at 2-15 had the support of the Nets'
Jersey-bred owners, and George Steinbrenner, too.


``When you're losing like that, you don't want to go out for
dinner, you don't want to go out at all,'' Casey said. ``We're not
out of the woods yet, and we've got to go win on the road. But
right now, the darkness of Armageddon seems to be gone.''


Like the world, Casey made it across the bridge to the 21st
century. He's happy to still be home, in New Jersey.

