
Similar accusations have led state and local officials in
Colorado, North Dakota, and Arizona to drop their programs, while
Florida and California are scaling back theirs. In Georgia,
officials revamped their program after a Justice Department
investigation concluded that the state's ``paramilitary boot camp
model is not only ineffective, but harmful.''


Some experts regard the entire boot camp experiment as a cynical
political maneuver. ``Boot camps were just another knee-jerk
reaction, a way to get tough with juveniles that resonated with the
public and became a political answer,'' said Dr. David Altschuler,
a juvenile justice expert at the Institute for Policy Studies at
Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.


Still, some believe the programs, in some form, can be useful.


``These are tough kids, with tough problems, they need good
education and drug treatment and they also need to learn respect,
self-respect, discipline and a new way of conducting themselves in
society,'' Ms. Townsend said. ``Facilities that provide structure
and discipline can be run effectively and have a role in our fight
after juvenile crime.''


Many experts disagree, citing the expense of running such
programs properly.


``It's a budget issue,'' said Doris Mackenzie, a University of
Maryland criminology professor. ``They are popular in the public,
people feel we should treat these kids tough, and everyone can get
onto the bandwagon,'' she said. ``But when it comes to this extra
expense of doing the follow-up, we find, the money is not there.''


In any case, juvenile crime has been falling since 1994, after
an overall drop in the nation's juvenile population. This will make
it highly unlikely, say political observers, that voters will agree
to pay for individualized rehabilitation. Much more likely, they
say, is that the 27,000 young people who once went to boot camp
each year will instead be sent to prison.


As bad as boot camps have proven to be, Wells added, ``once you
start incarcerating kids, you have lost. But unfortunately, that is
where we seem headed.''

