
THIRD MILLENNIUM CELEBRATIONS CAST LIGHT ON TWO MEXICOS


By FRANC CONTRERAS


c.1999 Special to the Cox News Service


OAXACA CITY, Mexico _ While most of Mexico welcomed the Third
Millennium with fireworks, concerts and long-standing traditions,
the celebration was muted in rural areas by fear of rebel attacks
and the so-called Y2K bug's negative impact on tourism.


All across Mexico and here, in this well-known colonial city,
families joined together for traditional New Year's Eve supper and
counted down to mid-night wearing red underwear, which they believe
brings them good luck in the new year.


``I went to three different stores today looking for red
underwear,'' said Marta Ramales. ``But all the stores were out and
I couldn't find it anywhere.''


She opted for a red blouse and toasted the new millennium with
glass of strong mescal, Oaxaca's answer to tequila.


After the toast, each of her 20 family members ate 12 grapes
each, one for every month. The tradition comes from Spain, where
the fruit is eaten also to bring good luck in the new year.


Behind the celebrations, small business owners said Y2K began
with a drop off in tourism among international travelers,
especially from the United States. Many blamed it on fears of
possible Y2K computer troubles. For example, Mexico City airport
officials said 40 percent of flights on Dec. 31 were cancelled due
to ``mostly last-minute cancellations'' over Y2K concerns.


Still, young Mexican boys here in Oaxaca City celebrated the new
millennium as they do any New Year's Eve, by tossing firecrackers
in the fiesta-filled streets. And the city planned massive
fireworks display that would take place over the colonial-era
cathedral in the city center.


An even more festive atmosphere prevailed in streets of the
capital Mexico City.


The historic Paseo de la Reforma, the city's main boulevard, was
filled with tens of thousands of revelers, coming to see parades
and live concerts.


Cathedral bells rang in the main square, called the Zocalo,
where 300,000 people turned out for shows by Mexico's famous singer
Juan Gabriel and to hear 200 mariachis sing Las Golondrinas, a
traditional song that says good-bye to the old year.


Adding to the millennium fervor, President Ernesto Zedillo, in a
video-taped address, said, ``We are a country that does not measure
our history in months or years, but in


millenniums.''


In the Mexican capital, there was little talk of Y2K computer
glitches following months of claims by government officials that
Mexico is among the most Y2K-compliant nations in the hemisphere.
It has installed computer programs to prevent banking errors, and
to keep the national stock market _ the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores _
from crashing on the new year's first day of business.


A larger concern for the government is the threat of armed
guerillas of the Popular Revolutionary Army, or EPR, in the
mountain villages of the Sierra Madre del Sur in southern Mexico.


Heavily armed soldiers could be seen watching over villages near
Oaxaca City, thought to be rebel strongholds and stopping vehicles
at military checkpoints on the highways outside the city.


``We know the government is bringing troops to indigenous
villages to stop the rebels,'' said Pedro Nava Rodriguez, director
of the Organization of Towns and Neighborhoods in Guerrero. ``But
they are violating the human rights of innocent people who have
nothing to do with guerilla struggles.''


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

