
Until the beginning of the 20th century, the coverage of sports
in newspapers, except for the occasional heavyweight title fight or
a local football or baseball game, was little more than an
afterthought. Then, with increasing leisure time for readers to
both play and watch, sports grew more important to life and
lifestyle. Editors caught on, and sportswriting began to flourish.


Following is a list of seven sports columnists _ in roughly
chronological order _ who have arguably had the greatest impact on
their profession as both reporters and writers. There have been
numerous other distinguished sports journalists in the last 100
years _ from Charles Dryden to Frank Graham to Shirley Povich _ but
space dictates that the list be limited.


Those included here range from Ring Lardner, who began writing
about baseball in 1906, to Jim Murray, who wrote his sports column
nearly up to the day he died, in 1998. Lardner, Damon Runyon and
Grantland Rice were giants for the first half of the century. Red
Smith, Jimmy Cannon, Dick Young and Murray were prominent in the
second half.


Grantland Rice (1880-1954)


Rice was generally considered the best-known sportswriter of his
generation. He read widely and brought a certain literate quality
to sportswriting that hadn't quite been there before. He began
writing for The Nashville News in 1901, after graduation from
Vanderbilt. He later wrote for The New York Mail and The New York
Tribune. In 1930 he began his popular syndicated sports column,
``The Spotlight.'' Of the two so-called schools of sportswriting in
the early part of the century _ the skeptical ``Aw Nuts'' writers
versus the more romantic ``Gee Whiz'' writers _ Rice was clearly in
the latter group.


He wrote perhaps the most famous opening paragraph in
sportswriting history. It appeared on Oct. 19, 1924, as a lead to
his report on the Notre Dame-Army football game, won by Notre Dame,
and which starred the Fighting Irish backfield: ``Outlined against
a blue-gray October sky, the Four Horsemen rode again. In dramatic
lore they are known as Famine, Pestilence, Destruction, and Death.
These are only aliases. Their real names are Stuhldreher, Miller,
Crowley and Layden.''


Ring Lardner (1885-1933)


Lardner began his career as a sportswriter for The South Bend
(Ind.) Times, but made his greatest impact in newspapers as the
``Wake of the News'' sports columnist for The Chicago Tribune. His
literary fame, however, rests primarily on his short stories, such
as ``Alibi Ike'' and ``You Know Me Al.'' His inventions in language
and perspective also enlivened his sports columns.


From a column in 1910 in which he assumes the role of a
spectator for a Chicago White Sox-Philadelphia Athletics game:


``On my right sat a gent who knew something, and he soon gave
evidence of the fact. Morris Rath opened the Sox attack with a safe
bunt. He was nailed at second when Lord missed his swing on a hit
and run.


`` `Stealing second with nobody out,' remarked the guy who
knows. `And the papers call him a brainy ballplayer. If he had good
sense, he'd trade all his brains for a little bit of ability.'''


Damon Runyon (1884-1946)


He began writing for newspapers when he was 12 years old. He
worked for newspapers in Pueblo, Colo., Colorado Springs, Denver,
San Francisco and became one of the country's star reporters _ and
sports columnists _ with The New York American. He covered wars,
murder trials and World Series with equal distinction. Like
Lardner, it is Runyon's short stories that enlarged his fame. His
``Runyonesque'' characters live on in the musical ``Guys and
Dolls,'' adapted from his short stories.


From the lead in a column from the 1930 Kentucky Derby:


``Say, have they turned the pages


Back to the past once more?


Back to the racin' ages


An' a Derby out of the yore?


Say, don't tell me I'm daffy,


Ain't that the same ol' grin?


Why it's that handy


Guy named Sande,


Bootin' a winner in!''


Jimmy Cannon (1909-1973)


He was born in New York and grew up in Greenwich Village. He
wrote for several New York newspapers, covered the city and worked
as a war correspondent, but in 1946 he began his syndicated sports
column for The New York Post. He later moved on to The
Journal-American. His rich prose made him one of the most
distinctive columnists of the century, but he may have been best
known for the occasional column, ``Nobody Asked Me, But. ... ''


Following are some lines over the years from ``Nobody Asked Me,
But. ... '':


``It's almost impossible for a girl to be homely with a gardenia
in her hair.'' ... ``I've never seen a circus clown I thought was
funny.'' ... ``I can't ever remember staying for the end of a movie
in which the actors wore togas.'' ... ``The trouble with the big
leagues is that there aren't enough big leaguers.''


Dick Young (1918-1987)


He revolutionized sports coverage when, as a beat reporter for
The Daily News assigned to the Brooklyn Dodgers in the early 1940s,
he began to go into the clubhouse after games to find out what the
players had seen and thought during the game. Before this,
reporters in the press box wrote solely what the reporters had seen
and thought during a game. In 1957, Young began writing his column,
``Young Ideas,'' after the team owner, Walter O'Malley, decided to
move the Dodgers to Los Angeles. In 1982 he moved on to The New
York Post. Writing with wit and a hard-hitting, direct style, he
was frequently in verbal battles with an assortment of sports
figures throughout his years as a columnist.


The following is from a 1957 column:


``This is called an obit, which is short for obituary. An obit
tells of a person who has died, how he lived, and of those who live
after him. This is the obit on the Brooklyn Dodgers.


``Preliminary diagnosis indicates that the cause of death was an
acute case of greed, followed by severe political implications. ...
and, now, Walter O'Malley leaves Brooklyn a rich man and a despised
man.''


Jim Murray (1919-1998)


Murray, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1990, began his career as a
reporter for The New Haven Register. He moved on to write for The
Los Angeles Examiner, Time magazine and Sports Illustrated, before
joining The Los Angeles Times as a sports columnist in 1961. He
soon became widely syndicated, and was highly praised for his
acerbic wit (and, not surprisingly, highly denounced by some of the
subjects of his wit). But, like all good writers, he could also
touch a sensitive chord.


From a column in 1979, in which he tells of the loss from an
operation of his ``good eye'' _ the other eye had seen only a hazy
world _ and now admitted that he was virtually blind: ``I'd like to
see Sugar Ray Robinson or Muhammad Ali giving a recital, a ballet,
not a fight. Also, to be sure, I'd like to see a sky full of stars,
moonlight on the water, and yes, the tips of a royal flush peaking
out as I fan out a poker hand, and, yes, a straight two-foot putt.


``Come to think of it, I'm lucky. I saw all of those things. I
see them yet.''

