
The 86th Rose Bowl was billed as a potential
offensive shootout, but it turned into a defensive battle decided
in large part by injuries and by the kicking game.


And, ultimately, by Ron Dayne.


Dayne, the National Collegiate Athletic Association's career
rushing leader, gained 200 yards Saturday on 34 carries, set a Rose
Bowl career scoring record with a touchdown and captured the most
valuable player honor for the second consecutive year as Wisconsin
wore down and defeated outmanned but stubborn Stanford, 17-9, in
the lowest-scoring Rose Bowl in 23 years.


Dayne ran for 154 yards in the second half. He finished his
career with 728 yards in bowl games and 6,397 in the regular season
_ a total of 7,125. He set up his 4-yard touchdown run with a
64-yard rumble up the middle on the second play of the third
quarter that put the Badgers ahead for good at 10-9.


The Cardinal, inspired by the play of the injured stars Troy
Walters and Willie Howard, was victimized by a first-half ankle
injury to its long snapper, Jon Sande. Two errant snaps by his
replacement, Anthony Gabriel, resulted in a missed extra point and
a blocked field goal, the only turnover of the game.


Stanford led by 9-3 at halftime. But Wisconsin held the
Cardinal, the Pacific-10 champion, to minus-5 yards rushing over
all and was able to contain its big-play offense throughout the
second half. Stanford averaged 467 yards during the season, but was
held to 264 yards by Wisconsin.


The Badgers' redshirt freshman quarterback, Brooks Bollinger,
completed two critical passes to tight end John Sigmund late in the
game, leading to Bollinger's 1-yard touchdown sneak with 7 minutes
22 seconds left.


Stanford (8-4) was making its first Rose Bowl appearance in 28
years and had a last-gasp chance to tie the score, but its drive
was snuffed out with 1:11 left when quarterback Todd Husak slipped
and fell with Ben Herbert bearing down on him on fourth-and-12 from
his 46-yard line.


Wisconsin (10-2), which beat UCLA last year, became the first
Big Ten school to win consecutive Rose Bowl games (the conference
had a no-repeat rule from 1946-60). The Big Ten has won seven of
the last eight Rose Bowl games.


``When we found out we had a chance to make history, it became
one of the goals I addressed with the team,'' said Wisconsin Coach
Barry Alvarez, who had knee replacement surgery earlier this season
and manned the sidelines with a cane. ``There's nothing like doing
something no one else has done.''


It was an equally historic game for Dayne, the Heisman Trophy
winner, who was held to 46 yards in the first half. Dayne had four
touchdowns last year, and his total of 30 points is a Rose Bowl
record.


``We had a nice talk at halftime and everybody got motivated,''
said Dayne, who ran for 246 yards against UCLA in last year's Rose
Bowl. ``On the long run, I saw the hole and I just ran through it.
It really gave us momentum and we carried it on. It would have been
nice if we could have kept scoring so we wouldn't have had to bite
our nails to the end.''


Stanford opened the game with a disregard for injury reports. It
started Walters, its all-American receiver, despite a dislocated
wrist; Howard, the mainstay defensive lineman, despite a torn knee
ligament; and center Mike McLaughlin despite a knee injury.
McLaughlin lasted only one play, but Walters and Howard were key
elements in a surprisingly effective game plan.


During the regular season, Wisconsin's offense averaged 35.6
points a game and Stanford averaged 37.2. So the two teams looked
as if they were impostors during a scoreless first quarter that had
punters Sean Tolpinrud of Stanford and Kevin Stemke of Wisconsin
vying for most valuable player honors.


The Cardinal defense, ranked 110th in the nation, swarmed around
Dayne and sniffed out every rollout pass play by Bollinger,
limiting Wisconsin to 12 yards over the first 15 minutes.


``We hadn't played since early November and we didn't have our
rhythm,'' Alvarez said. ``They had a very good scheme and they did
a great job with our tendencies, anticipating what we would call.''


But late in the first quarter with Stanford backed up against
its goal line, Husak got breathing room when he hit Howard with a
play-action 28-yard completion. Kerry Carter scored Stanford's only
touchdown on a 1-yard run in the second quarter.

