
Acting president Vladimir Putin moved quickly Saturday
to establish himself as Russia's new leader by flying to the
embattled republic of Chechnya to praise the army.


Russia's most popular politician took over the reins of power
after Boris Yeltsin's surprise New Year's Eve announcement he was
resigning as president after eight tumultuous years. Putin held the
post as prime minister and, under the Russian Constitution, takes
over Yeltsin's job until new elections are held.


The slight, judo-loving former KGB officer is favored to win the
elections, tentatively set for March 26. However, analysts agree
the next three months will be a crucial test of his skills in
navigating Russia's rough-and-tumble political waters.


Putin, 47, showed some political savvy when he skipped a fancy
dinner in Moscow to celebrate the New Year with the 100,000 troops
engaged in a three-month-long battle against what the Kremlin calls
Islamic terrorists in Chechnya.


``I want you to know that Russia highly appreciates what you are
doing,'' Putin told soldiers as he pinned medals on their chests.


``This (war) is not just about restoring the honor and dignity
of Russia. It is rather more important than that. It is about
putting an end to the break up of the Russian Federation,'' he said
in remarks carried live on Russian TV from a Russian-held town near
the Chechen capital, Grozny.


As he has in the past, Putin said there was no deadline for
ending the war.


The televised images of a robust and confident Putin among his
troops on the front lines was a marked contrast with the frail
68-year-old Yeltsin, whose has been repeatedly hospitalized in
recent years due to health problems.


Meanwhile, thousands of civilians trapped in Grozny spent a
miserable night as Russian jets pummeled the city in one of the
heaviest attacks yet in the three-month campaign, The Associated
Press reported.


The war, supported by the majority of Russians, is the main
policy that Putin pursued during his four-month tenure as prime
minister. It is credited with vaulting his career as a unknown
bureaucrat to the odds-on favorite to win the election to succeed
Yeltsin. His approval rating as prime minister ran consistently at


almost 80 percent.


``He has shown himself a true politician,'' said Leonid Ionin, a
Moscow political analyst. ``Putin is taking off right now and he
will almost automatically become president.''


Yeltsin's announcement of early retirement is expected to boost
Putin's electoral chances. His seemingly unassailable ratings could
slip if losses mount in Chechnya and Russian forces get bogged down
in protracted


fighting, even if they seize control of Grozny.


Nonetheless, Putin currently enjoys considerable support in
Moscow among the country's leading politicians.


In Dec. 19 parliamentary elections, his political party, Unity,
won 23 percent of the vote and leads the largest bloc in
parliament. In the days leading up to the New Year, Putin also won
the support of other parties led by politicians traditionally close
to Yeltsin.


Meanwhile Saturday, Yeltsin spent his first full day out of
office with his wife, Lyudmila, at their government country house
outside Moscow.


ENDIT


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

