
It feels a bit silly to report that, yes indeed,
the sun came up here Saturday.


But it was no ordinary dawn.


Set on the easternmost point in the continental United States,
the candy-cane-striped lighthouse here at West Quoddy Head
attracted nearly 500 people so eager to greet the new year Saturday
morning that they wanted to be sure to catch the first rays of its
first American day.


And catch them they did, though a little later than planned.


Lubec's claim to the millennium's first light had been based on
expectations that the sun would rise here at just after 7:04 a.m.,
theoretically beating out by milliseconds competitors on Cadillac
Mountain in Bar Harbor, Maine, and on Nantucket Island in
Massachusetts.


But the sun's upper tip did not flare above Grand Manan Island
on the Bay of Fundy until about 7:09; and plans to compare sunrise
moments in real-time with people in Nantucket and Bar Harbor failed
because of spotty cell-phone reception (which might have been
because of the phone freezing in the frigid morning air.)


No matter. Nobody seemed to have felt cheated as the sun rose
into a gilded blue sky, sending a glimmering column of blinding
orange reflection straight across the water.


Paula Tinker of Lubec, who plays the bagpipes, had prepared the
crowd for sunrise with a piped rendition of Beethoven's Ninth
Symphony until her fingers became too stiff from the cold; and
Hovey Hall, a local trumpeter, led the crowd in the National Anthem
_ whose line about the ``dawn's early light'' seemed unusually
apropos.


A Navy color guard raised the American flag, which was too
frozen to flap in the light breeze, and a Lubec school choir in
L.L. Bean-sponsored hats and gloves sang ``Children of Peace.''


There were even enough fireworks left from earlier Saturday
morning to set off a last 100-shot salute in celebration of the
sun's appearance.


On such a morning, in midwinter Maine, ``Who would believe there
wouldn't be a bit of wind,'' said Wendell Denbow, a carpenter who
was watching his daughter, Brittany, sing in the chorus. ``It's a
good sign, a good omen.''


Marilyn Ness, a member of the town's millennium committee, was
similarly thankful that the weather was not foggy, or else the
foghorn at the lighthouse would have been bellowing. Some on the
committee, she said, had joked about knitting a great stocking to
muffle it, just in case.


She and other residents remained slightly amazed at all the
attention accorded to Lubec, a fishing hamlet of about 1,800 that
residents candidly describe as usually quite dull.


``This was a small, hometown celebration geared toward peace and
children,'' Ms. Ness said, ``and somehow the media got hold of it,
and it just got ridiculous.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


Still, unabashed, Lubec offered New Year's visitors the best of
tiny-town charm, from a bonfire at the Frog Pond on Friday night to
Saturday morning's free breakfast at the American Legion hall.
(Those who ventured as far as the nearest city, Eastport, on Friday
night also got to see the Maine version of the Times Square
dropping of the ball: A lighted lobster pot was dropped from a
crane into the ocean.)


Cooking on campstoves outside the American Legion hall,
volunteers on Saturday served up blueberry pancakes, blueberry
muffins, red flannel hash, eggs, bacon, ham, donuts and more to all
comers _ of which there were many, a line of three dozen stretching
into the parking lot by 8 a.m.


Though the breakfast was a New Year's celebration, it also
seemed a celebration of small-town warmth.


``This takes it back to the way it should be _ you don't find
communities like this any more,'' said Bill Halligan as he dished
out a casserole concoction that he had decided to tell diners was
``cheese sausage toast souffle.''


``The heck with the football games,'' he said.


The breakfast was the idea of two Lubec friends, Alan Mead and
Herb Phillips. ``We decided we'd do a breakfast,'' Mead said, ``and
I said, `Let's make it free so everyone will come.' And look at the
line we've got!''


Inserted Halligan, ``He's always doing something nice.''


The kettle-drum-sized pan of hash that Mead was stirring seemed
to keep changing back and forth between home fries and hash,
depending on what ingredients came his way. What would happen, he
was asked, if the food, some donated and some paid for by
contributors, ran out?


``Both grocery stores in town are open today,'' he said, ``so
we'll have something.''


That small-town flavor cheered visitors like Andy Solomon and
Shirley Fan, who came from Astoria, Queens, for the celebration. As
the sun rose, Solomon said, ``I was just thinking how incredibly
nice everybody is here.''

