
The total of six yards rushing in the Big 12 championship loss
to Nebraska was a school worst. But the minus-27 yards rushing in
the Cotton Bowl on Saturday quickly replaced that as the lowest
total for any game ever played by the Longhorns.


Eight sacks by the Razorbacks accounted for minus-64 yards in
what was another miserable game for the UT offensive line.


In the first 11 games this season, the Texas offensive line
allowed 19 sacks. In the last three games, the men up front have
allowed 20 sacks, including seven against Nebraska and five against
Texas A&AMP;M.


It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out why Texas lost
all three of those games.


Along with the eight sacks allowed Saturday, the offensive line
also was whistled for four false starts. It's easy to see why Texas
did not score an offensive touchdown in the last 10 quarters of the
season.


``I think it's clear that we have to do a better job of running
the football,'' said Texas coach Mack Brown. ``In games where we
ran well, we were pretty good. When we didn't rush the ball well,
our quarterbacks haven't had time to throw the football.''


Texas had four new starters on the offensive line this season,
so things should improve in the future. Two of the starters _
junior tackle Leonard Davis (6-6, 365 pounds) and sophomore guard
Antwan Kirk-Hughes (6-3, 320) _ were two of the most highly
recruited players in the state after their senior years in high
school.


Every man on the offensive line has looked bad at times in the
last three games, but part of the problem Saturday was an
exceptional effort by the Arkansas defensive line. The eight sacks
were a season high for the Razorbacks.


``All the talk all week was how good the Texas defensive line
was and how much bigger they were than us,'' said Arkansas
defensive tackle D.J. Cooper, who was voted the game's Defensive
Most Valuable Player. ``We may be a little smaller, but than
doesn't mean we aren't good players.''


Cooper (6-3, 280) had five unassisted tackles, including two
sacks and one other tackle for a loss. It was a meaningful day for
the senior from Mesquite, who had been accused of wrongdoing
earlier in the week.


In a pending divorce complaint, a Dallas woman named Karey
Harrod claimed Cooper was paid for work he did not perform at J&AMP;H
Trucking Co., which is owned by her husband and father-in-law.


``It's all false allegations from a woman who is trying to get
back at that family,'' Cooper said. ``I remember she used to always
cause problems when I was working there.''


Cooper was cleared by Arkansas officials, who said all the money
he was paid came from work he performed. Cooper said he didn't let
the accusations affect his play.


``I wasn't going to let something like that cause me to lose my
focus, but it did motivate me,'' he said. ``If someone slanders
your name like that, you want to show they can't get to NO CARRIER
RING
CONNECT LAPM

