
Primeau deal goes bust


Despite the fact Carolina's deal to send Keith Primeau, a
minor-league defenseman and two draft picks to Phoenix for Keith
Tkachuk fell through, it's more certain than ever Primeau will not
be back with the Hurricanes. When it was learned Primeau had
pre-approved a four-year, $16.9 million contract with the Coyotes,
which is not far off the offers Carolina had tendered, 'Canes
winger Gordie Roberts went ballistic. ``He has hung this entire
team out to dry,'' Roberts said. ``We're going out there on the ice
busting our butts every night, and he's been rejecting offers that
have been fair. I wouldn't be saying this if I didn't think the
team had made fair offers. Twenty million dollars. Twelve million
dollars. What's the difference between the Phoenix deal and what
he's been offered here? ... As a team, we've been taking the
approach that Primeau is like an injured player and he'll be coming
back. Now, we've got to stop thinking about him and just get on
with it.'' Primeau said Roberts' anger is ``misdirected,'' adding,
``Everything was all right (this season) when they were winning
games. All of a sudden, I'm responsible for them losing seven of
the last nine games?''


A slow burn in Boston


This is not an endorsement for Boston to fire coach Pat Burns,
but after going 2-7-4 in a span of 13 games, Burns has come to the
conclusion that his players have rejected his philosophies. ``I
just can't understand it,'' he said. ``Over the past two years,
this club has played a certain way. We've picked up 180-odd points
in two years, we've gone three rounds in the playoffs. All of a
sudden, it's not good enough anymore. Now, we have to pinch, we
have to take chances, be more offensive and try to copy other teams
and this is the result _ giving up two-on-ones. I watched New
Jersey-Buffalo and Buffalo gave up about 10 two-on-ones. If you're
going to play like that, you're not going to win too many hockey
games.'' Burns said when he asked one player how he wanted to play,
the player responded, ``Creatively.'' For structured coaches like
Burns, ``creativity'' is synonymous with poison.


Briefly . . .


The Panthers, convinced Trevor Kidd's return this year is a long
shot, made a good move acquiring Mike Vernon from San Jose. Despite
his age, Vernon, 36, might have one good year left in him. The
Panthers also are on the hook for only the remaining $2.4 million
of his $4.38 million contract this year. But Vernon also has a
$3.25 million option kick in for next year if he plays 40 games (25
more). . . . It's becoming more likely that John McMullen will sell
the New Jersey Devils and become a minority owner of the New York
Jets. Expect the selling price to the YankeesNets group to come at
about $165 million _ a slight escalation over the $34 million
McMullen paid in 1992. . . . Alexei Yashin returned to the United
States to spend time with family members and girlfriend, Carol Alt,
but says he will be back in Switzerland this week working out with
a club team there. Nothing new on talks with Ottawa.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

