
Fred Saigh, a former owner of the St. Louis Cardinals who was
forced out of baseball in 1953 when he was sentenced to federal
prison for income-tax evasion but kept the team in St. Louis by
selling it to the locally based Anheuser-Busch brewery, died
Wednesday at a hospital in Chesterfield, Mo. He was 94.


A small, dapper man with an eye for big business deals, having
owned prime real estate in downtown St. Louis during the 1940s,
Saigh bridged two longtime Cardinal ownerships. Sam Breadon, who
sold the club to Saigh in November 1947, had been the team
president for 27 years. Anheuser-Busch, whose owner, August A.
Busch Jr., bought the franchise from Saigh in February 1953, would
run it for 43 years.


When Saigh departed the ownership ranks three months before
heading to the federal penitentiary in Terre Haute, Ind. _ the Mark
Harris baseball novel ``The Southpaw'' under his arm _ Saigh acted
to preserve National League baseball for St. Louis. Although he
said the $3.75-million bid he received from Anheuser-Busch was
lower than offers from interests in Milwaukee and Houston, he
accepted it to insure continuing local control.


Frederick Michael Saigh Jr. (pronounced sigh), a native of
Springfield, Ill., grew up in Kewanee, Ill., the son of a
grocery-chain owner. He attended Bradley University and
Northwestern, became a lawyer, moved to St. Louis and eventually
bought office buildings.


He purchased the Cardinals from Breadon for an estimated $4
million, taking control with Robert E. Hannegan, who resigned as
the U.S. postmaster general to join baseball. Two years later,
Saigh bought out Hannegan.


The Cardinals had won four pennants during the 1940s, but their
farm system, established by Branch Rickey two decades earlier, was
drying up when Saigh bought the team. He never had a pennant-winner
in his five seasons as owner, but he was generous with his players,
giving a dozen of them raises in midsummer 1949 as the team battled
for a pennant, only to be beaten out by the Brooklyn Dodgers. Saigh
freely expressed his opinions about his team, always remaining
optimistic, though he knew little about baseball.


Eddie Dyer, who managed the Cardinals in Saigh's first three
seasons as their owner, confided dryly to a sports columnist that
``in his very first year he has learned more baseball than John
McGraw ever knew in a lifetime.''


Saigh maneuvered, meanwhile, in baseball's ownership ranks, and
was a leader in the club owners' revolt that ousted commissioner
Happy Chandler in 1951.


In April 1952, Saigh was indicted on federal charges of evading
$49,260 in income taxes between 1946 and 1949. He pleaded no
contest in January 1953 to two counts involving more than $19,000
in tax underpayments, was sentenced to 15 months in prison and then
sold the team in February under pressure from Commissioner Ford
Frick.


Saigh was released from prison in November 1953 after serving
six months and soon began buying shares in Anheuser-Busch. He was
said to have become the largest single owner of the brewery's stock
outside the Busch family, at one point with holdings worth about
$60million.


He is survived by a brother, William, and a sister, Rose Saigh,
both of St. Louis.


Despite his large stock holdings, Saigh was long angry with
Anheuser-Busch over who deserved credit for keeping the team in St.
Louis.


``I didn't want the Cardinals to leave St. Louis,'' Saigh told
The St. Louis Post-Dispatch in 1992. ``Anheuser-Busch's publicity
department turned it around that Mr. Busch was a savior. But it was
sort of a mutual thing. I was bitter and I was hurt _ still am.''


He never attended a Cardinal game while the brewery owned the
club. But in 1996, the new owners, Bill DeWitt Jr., Drew Baur and
Fred Hanser, having bought the team from Anheuser-Busch, persuaded
Saigh to go to the ballpark.


More than four decades after he last saw the Cardinals, then
playing in Sportsman's Park, Saigh got a look at his old franchise
_ at Busch Stadium.

