
A plan by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
to put hundreds of new diesel-powered buses on New York City
streets in the next five years is drawing determined resistance
from environmentalists and legislators, who say it will increase
smog and health problems.


Those critics note that Los Angeles, Cleveland and other major
cities have barred purchases of diesel buses and have switched to
models that use cleaner-burning compressed natural gas. But the
MTA's $17.5 billion capital plan, announced in September, would put
greater emphasis on speed and capacity by adding faster and larger
buses using diesel fuel.


And while the authority does plan to continue buying some
natural gas buses, it is focusing its antipollution efforts on an
experimental hybrid engine that runs on both diesel and
electricity.


``We haven't put our heads in the sand on this issue,'' said
Lawrence G. Reuter, the president of New York City Transit, the MTA
subsidiary responsible for subways and buses.


In an interview on Wednesday, Reuter said the authority was
taking a bold step forward in the technology of mass
transportation. Within eight years, he said, it hopes to begin
converting the hybrid buses to use fuel cells, a technology that
powers buses entirely with rechargeable electric batteries.


Until now, most of the criticism of the capital spending
proposal had focused on whether the authority was thinking big
enough about new construction projects like the Second Avenue
subway. But with the spending plan entering serious negotiations in
Albany, where it must be approved by the Legislature and Gov.
George E. Pataki, attention has shifted to the proposal to buy
1,056 new buses. The authority says more than 70 percent of them
will be powered at least in part by diesel fuel.


The critics say the MTA should move more rapidly to reduce
diesel emissions, which have been linked to asthma and other
respiratory illnesses. In New York City, studies have shown the
asthma rate to be three times the national average. Natural gas
provides the only proven low-pollution alternative to diesel, the
critics say.


``We know that converting the fleet to natural gas is a big,
tough task, but we are hopeful that the MTA will find a way to do
it,'' said Richard Kassel, a senior lawyer for the Natural
Resources Defense Council. Kassel met with senior transit officials
last week to make the case for natural gas.


The transportation authority may face a more powerful opponent
in Sheldon Silver, the Assembly speaker, who is one of four members
of a state panel that oversees the agency. The authority needs the
panel's unanimous approval to put the five-year plan in place.
Other members include representatives of the Senate, Pataki and
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Silver, who represents Manhattan's Lower East Side, has reserved
his strongest objections for the failure to plan on an extension of
the Second Avenue subway to Lower Manhattan. But he has also
sharply criticized the authority's plan to buy diesel buses.


``It just doesn't make sense,'' Silver said on Wednesday, adding
that he would use his veto power if the authority did not reduce
its reliance on diesel. ``Buying dirty buses is counterproductive
to the overall goal of improving air quality.''


The MTA plan would spend $800 million on the 1,056 new buses,
including 300 standard-size 44-seat buses. Although the authority
has said all the new standard-size buses will be fuel efficient, it
said that how many would be diesel-electric hybrids and how many
would use natural gas had not been decided.


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

