
Just four months ago, only those living in the
small farming town tucked between the Blue Ridge Mountains and
Allegheny Mountains in Southwestern Virginia had any idea about
what the nation was about to witness.


Now, as the national championship game approaches, quarterback
Michael Vick, the steady, sturdy, leader of the second-ranked
Virginia Tech Hokies, is a household name in more locales than
Blacksburg.


Vick needed one season to lead the Hokies to an unbeaten record
and a date with Florida State in Tuesday's Sugar Bowl. He did so by
showing poise far beyond his 19 years, and a style that has many
comparing him to Charlie Ward, the Seminoles' Heisman
Trophy-winning quarterback of the early '90s.


``This is a culmination of a team that (coach) Frank (Beamer)
has built, that reached its peak and was lacking a quarterback and
the guy showed up,'' Florida State coach Bobby Bowden said. ``The
guy that could make them a team showed up and now they're the real
deal.''


Vick's numbers aren't overwhelming. He completed just 90 passes,
on 152 attempts, for 1,840 yards and 12 touchdowns. He led the
nation with a 180.4 pass efficiency rating, but he attempted 80
fewer passes than Florida State's Chris Weinke completed. Vick's
total offense number of 2,420 yards isn't close to Weinke's 3,103
passing yards.


Yet, the intangibles that Vick brought the Hokies are
immeasurable, which is why he was third in the Heisman voting,
tying for the highest finish ever by a freshman.


``Michael Vick is just getting started,'' Clemson defensive
coordinator Reggie Herring said. ``The way they run the offense,
protect him with play-action, and got a running game to keep you
off balance ... he's headed for stardom.''


Vick redshirted a year ago after listening to Beamer. The Hokies
prepared for Vick to take over by finishing 9-3 last season as Vick
was making a name for himself in practice, running around in the
backfield and throwing balls more than 60 yards.


While Beamer had no doubts who his quarterback would be in 1999,
he still was not sure what to expect from an untested player.


``That's what we didn't know, how good he will be in the games
themselves,'' Beamer said. ``It didn't take long to see how poised
he was going to be. I believe he likes the pressure situations. He
is very much unlike a redshirt freshman.''


Vick, who attended high school on Virginia's east coast, is
surprised by how easily he picked up the college game. Although he
was the No.5 quarterback prospect in the nation according to
SuperPrep magazine, and posted gaudy numbers at Newport News'
Warwick High (4,846 passing yards, 1,048 rushing yards), Vick
thought he would need at least a year to adjust to a faster game.


``I kind of expected to go through a lot of growing pains this
season,'' he said. ``Things happened so fast, I came out there and
was relaxed and its been kind of easy.''


If not for his high school coach, former World Football League
MVP and actor Tommy Reamon, Vick may have wound up following
Donovan McNabb at Syracuse. Reamon, who played running back Delma
Huddle in the 1970s movie ``North Dallas Forty,'' is not fond of
Syracuse coach Paul Pasqualoni. Reamon believes former Warwick
quarterback Aaron Brooks was unfairly held back at Syracuse for two
years before emerging as a starter his final two years. He saw Vick
falling into the same situation, especially after Syracuse
recruited quarterbacks Troy Nunes and Madei Williams two years ago.


``They kept saying publicly they had (Vick) if it wasn't for the
high school coach,'' Reamon said. ``Don't play games with me. Don't
play business games with me and my children. Look at it now. Would
you want to put him in that situation? Two-quarterback system?


``I could see it happening. Pasqualoni can talk all day long.''


Vick took an official visit to Syracuse where McNabb, the
quarterback to whom he was being compared at the time, was his
host. Vick said McNabb did not try to influence his decision.


Vick, more diplomatic than his high school coach, cited two
reasons for choosing Virginia Tech _ staying in state where his
family could see him play and, ``I don't want to run the option. I
don't want to get hit a lot.''


Now, Michael Vick is a big hit. The Hokies' history at
quarterback never will be confused with that of the University of
Miami's, but Vick should surpass them all, including two with South
Florida ties: former Dolphins quarterback Don Strock, and Jim
Druckenmiller, whom the Dolphins traded for in September.


Strock, the director of football operations at Florida
International University, played in Blacksburg in 1971 and '72 and
still holds most of the Hokies' passing records.


``He's a tremendous athlete and they use his skills very well,''
Strock said. ``They get him out of the pocket, he throws on the
run. When you have an athletic quarterback like Vick, it puts a lot
of stress on the defense.''


Druckenmiller led Virginia Tech to its two previous biggest bowl
dates, the 1995 Sugar against Texas and 1996 Orange against
Nebraska. He believes Vick and the Hokies have been overlooked. He
thought Vick should have finished ahead of Heisman runner-up Joe
Hamilton, and thinks the Hokies are taking a back seat to Florida
State.


``I still don't think Virginia Tech gets all the respect we
deserve,'' Druckenmiller said.


Michael Vick should change that.


Tom D'Angelo writes for the Palm Beach Post


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

