
Barely six months ago, Brazil's
government achieved a long-cherished objective with a carefully
negotiated merger of all three of its military forces into a single
ministry that is theoretically under civilian control.


But now, to the government's embarrassment, the air force, the
most nationalistic of Brazil's armed services, is very noisily
challenging that concept.


The dispute has already led to the dismissal of the air force
chief, Gen. Walter Brauer. But it has also raised questions about
the proper role of the Brazilian military in politics and the
economy at a time when President Fernando Henrique Cardoso is
intent on reducing the size and reach of the state.


Though Brazil was ruled by a military dictatorship from 1964 to
1985, no one is suggesting that insubordination by the air force
could lead to a coup attempt. The armed forces do not appear to
have either the capacity or the desire for such an action, which in
any case would probably be answered with resistance from the
civilian population and sanctions by Brazil's allies, neighbors and
trading partners.


The crisis has been brewing at least since June, when Elcio
Alvares, a former senator, was sworn in as the first civilian
defense minister in this nation of 165 million people, and the
army, navy and air force were forced to give up the separate
cabinet-level posts they had always held. At that ceremony, Brauer
very publicly snubbed Alvares. He did not congratulate his new
boss, and he led a walkout of senior air force officers.


The immediate cause of Brauer's dismissal, however, was his
criticism of a close aide and former law partner of Alvares whose
name has surfaced in a congressional drug-trafficking
investigation. Contending that ``public life has to be very
unblemished and transparent,'' Brauer seemed to suggest in
testimony before the congressional panel that the aide should be
fired.


That breach of hierarchy and protocol irritated Cardoso, and on
Dec. 17 Alvares was ordered to get rid of both the aide and Brauer.


But political analysts note that larger issues lie behind the
dismissal. David Fleischer, a professor at the University of
Brasilia, said that the air force was ``the branch of the armed
forces targeted for the greatest negative impact'' by the
government's policy of selling off state-owned companies.


The dominant nationalist wing of the air force has been
particularly upset by the recent purchase of a 20 percent interest
in the highly successful aircraft-manufacturing company Embraer by
a French consortium. The company was founded by the air force and
later transferred to private Brazilian concerns, but the military
regards the entry of foreign capital in a ``strategic sector'' as
harmful to Brazil's national defense and commercial interests.


Similarly, the Cardoso administration is now discussing the
privatization of Brazil's airports, despite objections by the air
force, which fears that commercial interests will buy only those
that are profitable.


In addition, the government intends to create a civil aviation
agency soon, and that would strip the air force of both the
regulatory authority it currently exercises over airports and
flights and the profits and privileges that go with that control.


The two sides have also clashed over the direction of Brazil's
nascent space program. The government favors partnerships with
other nations, ranging from China to Ukraine, and with private
commercial interests. The air force prefers to go it alone and,
government officials contend privately, it has been secretly buying
strategic rocket components on the international black market.


(STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


On Dec. 28, scores of retired military officers and a handful of
active-duty generals and colonels attended a ``luncheon of
grievance'' here honoring Brauer. The leader of the retired
officers' club, Gen. Ercio Braga, criticized the government for
``disrespectful'' and ``coarse and surreptitious'' handling of the
controversy. The event and comments immediately drew fire from
Cardoso's supporters.


``I cannot let this go by without a response, because, above
all, it is necessary to defend democracy and institutional order,''
said Miro Teixeira, a prominent member of Congress. ``Military
officers are able to make such declarations thanks to a democracy
that they themselves did not help build.''


But an extreme right-wing member of Congress, Jair Bolsonaro,
who is a former soldier and who attended the protest luncheon,
added fuel to the fire by saying of Cardoso, ``For the crime he is
committing against the nation, his sentence should be death by
firing squad.'' Outraged fellow legislators now want Bolsonaro to
be suspended from office for a month, and a vote on such a measure
is tentatively scheduled for this week.

