
The New York Times said in an editorial for Sunday, Jan. 2:


At first glance, sales over the Internet do not look impressive,
accounting for between 0.3 percent and 3 percent of retail sales.
But a survey released last week by the Boston Consulting Group and
Shop.org, the trade association of online retailers, shows that
e-commerce during the holiday season has quadrupled since last
year, the first Christmas season for which Internet sales were
important. E-commerce looks poised to transform entire sectors of
the economy.


Internet sales have soared in apparel, books, music, specialty
foods, electronics, financial services and travel. The rapid growth
has created headaches. It turns out that designing a spiffy Web
site for customers to click and order from is a lot easier than
coordinating the mundane tasks of stocking popular items, pulling
them off the shelves and shipping them on time to meet customer
demands.


Despite its small size, electronic commerce is already reshaping
markets. Take term life insurance. Although few sales are completed
over the Internet, premiums plummeted over the past two years, says
Professor Austan Goolsbee of the University of Chicago, as
customers searched the Web for the best prices. Comparison shopping
is one of the key ways in which the Internet is shifting market
power from producers and distributors to ordinary consumers.
Customers are also finding novel uses of the Web. Many are selling
unwanted holiday gifts on eBay, the large online auctioneer.


Goolsbee makes a more subtle point about the impact of
e-commerce. Brokers _ by which he means people in any industry who
gather small pieces of information and sell services to consumers _
are vulnerable. Travel agents, stockbrokers, insurance agents and
even car dealers fit this category. The Internet can replace
brokers because it provides a fast, low-cost substitute way to sort
information.


The Internet could also do for retailing and information
services what the cable industry has done for television _ provide
niche services. The bricks-and-mortar way of doing business imposes
huge distribution costs that make it unprofitable for sellers to
cater to small groups. By directly connecting consumers and
producers, the Internet drastically cuts distribution costs and
makes it potentially profitable to sell specialty music recordings
and other such items, especially to higher-income families.


It is possible that Internet sales will turn out to be a fad.
But markets powerfully drive businesses toward low-cost, convenient
practices. There will be problems along the way, but the Internet
will likely change the way America does business far beyond the
habits of holiday shoppers.

