
School has been out at Cal State Northridge since
the week before Christmas, but since you can learn something every
day, Mississippi State's women's basketball team gave a lesson.


Northridge has talked about taking its game to the next level.
The 21st-ranked Bulldogs _ the first nationally ranked team to play
here in Northridge's Division I era _ gave a glimpse of that level
in a 98-64 nonconference victory before a crowd of 165 Friday
night.


It ended CSUN's 16-game home win streak.


Whether the Matadors learned from the Bulldogs (10-0) remains to
be seen. The Big Sky Conference season begins Thursday at Northern
Arizona, but the Matadors don't believe they'll face anyone of this
caliber.


``Our conference isn't that strong,'' Edneisha Curry admitted,
``so we have to play hard and play with the type of desire and
heart night in and night out, so we can play with Mississippi State
and all the other ranked teams.''


For now, they have completed the most difficult portion of the
schedule with two losses to nationally ranked teams in Illinois and
Mississippi State and a win over an NCAA Tournament team in
Dartmouth. It leaves them 6-4, the same record they had at this
time last year.


Then again, they weren't talking about elevating their game at
this time last year. Since the Matadors have reached the NCAA
Tournament and are hungry for more, Mississippi State provided
clues to what they need to do.


It's the basics: shoot a high percentage, rebound well and
commit fewer turnovers and fouls. Shooting 36.7 percent, taking
just 28 boards and committing 17 turnovers might be enough to win
the Big Sky, but it won't get you past Mississippi State, which
shot 50.7 percent and took 51 rebounds. Although the Bulldogs
turned over the ball the same number of times, they also committed
six fewer fouls.


It also helps to have a player like freshman LaToya Thomas, who
can deliver points in bunches when needed. Thomas scored 33,
including 18 in the first half, but was most valuable in the second
half when she scored eight points in a 10-0 run that ended any hope
of a Northridge comeback. CSUN had cut a 50-25 halftime deficit to
59-45 with 12:21 to play and had some momentum.


``Our goal in the second half was to cut it to 10 by the
10-minute mark,'' CSUN coach Frozena Jerro said.


Actually, Northridge has a Thomas-like player in Curry, who
scored 21 points. But she made 9 of 23 field-goal attempts, far
below Thomas' 11 of 18.


The other time Northridge was close was when it scored eight
straight points and trailed 13-12 with 12:46 to play in the first
half. Mississippi State responded with a 25-7 run in 9:10 to put
the game out of reach.


``Right now, they're getting a lot of experience,'' Bulldogs
coach Sharon Faning said. ``They need to work on footwork, defense,
rebounding _ same as us.''


Three other Mississippi State players scored in double figures:
Jennifer Fambrough (22), Cynthia Hall (11) and Meadow Overstreet
(11). Northridge got 14 from Lynda Amari and 13 from LaShaunda
Fowler.

