
For months we were told to hope for the best
but expect the Y2K worst.


Localized power outages? Quite possible. Problems with the water
supply? Could be. Are the banks ready? Better have some extra cash,
just in case. And food. Buy some extra food.


When the best happened, the first words we uttered were ``hype''
and ``scam.''


A world suffering a global party hangover woke up Saturday to
the anticlimax of the century. Everything still worked.


Money and time _ lots of both _ resulted in the Y2K bug being
pretty much a no-show, even though a lot more glitches began
surfacing Saturday.


John Koskinen, President Clinton's chief Y2K adviser, was
defending the $100 billion spent on Y2K by government and business
in the United States before the ball even dropped in Times Square
on New Year's Eve.


``I don't know anyone who's spent any time on this problem who
doubts that, had the effort not been made, had the money not been
spent, we would be in a very different situation here right now,''
Koskinen said Friday night.


``We would, I think, have significant failures.''


Koskinen and others cautioned that we were not out of the woods
yet. As has been warned for weeks, workers returning to their jobs
Monday still may face computer glitches and outright failures.


``There is too much focus on New Year's weekend,'' said Bruce
McConnell, director of the International Y2K Cooperation Center.
``If you think that the only time to worry about the Y2K bug is on
January 1, then you're underestimating the problem.''


Depending on which estimate you believe, government and business
worldwide spent either $320 billion or $500 billion on Y2K fixes.
Government officials and industry analysts said that much money,
plus the years of work spent by some companies to fix problems,
paid off.


``The fact that there was so much preparation done accounts for
the fact we have encountered so few problems,'' said Don Meyer,
spokesman for the U.S. Senate Special Committee on the Year 2000
Technology Problem.


Even so, there are plenty of unanswered questions.


In Russia many government agencies adopted a ``fix on failure''
approach: Don't bother until it breaks. At least two Middle Eastern
oil-producing countries took the same approach.


According to early reports, there were no widespread failures in
any of the three countries.


In fact, there were no reports of failures in those countries at
all _ although admittedly American intelligence in all three
countries is poor.


``Who could have expected so few problems?'' said Andy Kyte, an
analyst with GartnerGroup, a technology research firm that has been
following the Y2K issue.


``Closer analysis will show that so many businesses had shut
down for two or three days that, really, the world's computer
systems had been deactivated by year 2000,'' Kyte said. ``We still
have to wait and see whether under full load, doing all of their
transactions, they can cope with normal business'' in the year
2000.


John Gantz, chief researcher for Project Magellan, the Y2K
research arm of International Data Corp., agreed.


``Given the fact that most of the companies in the country are
small businesses and that two-thirds of them hadn't finished Y2K
remediation as of last night, I believe plenty of Y2K glitches have
yet to appear,'' Gantz said.


``Instead of one big flood, we're going to see a lot of leaky
basements.''


Among those urging caution Saturday was Peter de Jager, a
Canadian Y2K expert.


``It is very premature at this point in time to declare
victory,'' de Jager said. ``We expected the infrastructure to be
OK, but wait until next week to start drawing conclusions about how
successful or unsuccessful we've been.''


The Senate Year 2000 committee will continue to mop up those
leaks until Feb. 29, a leap-year date that computers may not
recognize. Day 1, Year 2000


In Kansas City, in Washington and across the world, technicians
spent New Year's Day scouring computer systems and checking office
buildings looking for snags caused by the Year 2000 computer
problem.


They found surprisingly little.


``All along our concern was the unknown,'' said Dean Katerndahl,
the Mid-America Regional Council's Y2K point man. ``And we still
don't know about some of the things that may be coming up in the
next weeks.''


It is not that there were not hundreds or even thousands of
minor glitches.


Six American nuclear power plants, including one in Little Rock,
Ark., had minor reporting problems that were fixed quickly. A
system used to track Amtrak trains had to be reset manually.


Equipment used at two Swedish hospitals to analyze
electrocardiogram data malfunctioned. The doors in a federal
building under renovation in Omaha, Neb., would not lock.


A U.S. spy satellite was knocked off line for a couple of hours.


In Brazil machines at three toll roads issued receipts with the
wrong date. A hospital in Sao Paulo was unable to use its
computerized patient registration system, and another hospital in
Recife had trouble using its internal record system.


In France the Syracuse II military satellite system was running
on a software patch while technicians worked on a permanent fix.


Microsoft, the world's largest software company, reported two
glitches. One caused the company's MoneyCentral Web site to vastly
overestimate the worth of some customers' portfolios. Microsoft
Hotmail users who left old mail in their online mailbox found that
it appeared to have been sent in 2099.


At a news conference Saturday, Koskinen said he was pleased with
the transition from 1999 to 2000.


``We have not been able to find anything of great
significance,'' he said.


Neither could officials in Kansas City.


``We saw nothing. We saw absolutely nothing,'' said Gary Brown,
the emergency services manager for the Mid-America Regional
Council. ``Not a single reported Y2K problem.'' Model of planning


Brown, who coordinated the region's Information Coordination
Center, attributed the quiet evening to planning and to public and
private partnerships.


What we got for the investment was a quiet evening and a
blueprint for future disasters.


Brown said he would have liked to have seen a Y2Klike emergency
network several years ago when an October surprise dumped a pile of
snow on Kansas City.


At the time, telephone lines were jammed, key officials did not
have the proper information, and emergency responses were delayed.
With the lessons learned from Y2K, a disaster response squad can be
established without reinventing the wheel, Brown said.

