
Indianapolis quarterback Peyton Manning is having an outstanding
season, but there is no question he is benefiting from the success
of running back Edgerrin James and wide receiver Marvin Harrison.
James and Harrison have combined for 3,672 yards, the
second-highest total in the 1990s by a running back/wide receiver
duo. James and Harrison may yet pass running back Emmitt Smith and
wide receiver Michael Irvin of Dallas, who combined for 3,751 yards
in 1995.


Right behind James and Harrison is the St. Louis duo of Marshall
Faulk and Isaac Bruce. They have 3,520 yards this season.


Blue in the Bayou


This has been a miserable season for rookie running back Ricky
Williams. His New Orleans team has won three games. Coach Mike
Ditka has said Williams needs to improve his conditioning and has
even called him weird because he wears his helmet while doing
interviews.


Williams may have reason to be grouchy. His base salary for this
season, because of a highly questionable contract he signed after
becoming the No. 1 player in the draft, is just $175,000. He had
the chance to earn more than $3 million in incentives, but will get
only $50,000 because of his poor rushing numbers and the terrible
season the Saints have had.


Meanwhile, Ditka believes he will be back as coach next season.
If he does return, owner Tom Benson may ask for major changes in
his staff.


Around the League


San Diego Coach Mike Riley called the Pro Bowl snub of Chargers
linebacker Junior Seau a travesty. ... The Jets' defensive
coordinator, Bill Belichick, remains the No. 1 candidate to replace
coach Pete Carroll in New England. Coach Bill Parcells, meanwhile,
has already completed his book on the 1999 season. The manuscript
contains no hints about his future plans. ... With one Sunday left
in the regular season, 21 players have broken the 1,000-yard
receiving mark, the second-largest group ever. Eight players are
within 100 yards of 1,000. In 1995, 23 players had 1,000-yard
receiving seasons. ... The Baltimore Ravens recently added a
minority investor, Stephen Bisciotti, who also has an option to buy
the remaining 51 percent of the franchise from the principal owner,
Art Modell, in 2004. Yet Modell said, ``I plan on being in the NFL
for a long time.''

