
Florida State football. In the process, he
joined Bear Bryant, Pop Warner, Amos Alonzo Stagg and Joe Paterno
as the only major-college coaches to win 300 games. He doesn't care
how cliche it sounds to link war and football; they have been his
passions since he was bedridden with rheumatic fever as a
13-year-old in Birmingham, Ala.


For six months, Bowden listened to World War II on the radio,
imagining how the great generals' feigns and flanking maneuvers
looked on the battle field. He shared the room with his
grandfather, Robert Cleckler who was of German descent, so he paid
special attention to enemy movements.


From Rommel, Bowden learned a lesson about strategy. From
Patton, MacArthur and the victors, he learned two traits that
embody his Florida State program.


``Rommel was a great tactician _ he knew how to think in
surprises,'' Bowden said. ``He could do more with less than any of
the great generals. They all demonstrate discipline and that you
need reserves so if you're getting annihilated on one front, you
can attack somewhere else.''


The traits that would help Bowden claim his spot in college
football history were in place in 1955 when, as a 25-year-old, he
took his first head coaching job at South Georgia College. He won
22 games there, but they don't count on his record because at the
time it was a two-year school.


From the start, he showed a knack for recruiting. His team was
culled from farm boys and returning veterans. He plucked his
assistant and childhood friend, Vince Gibson, from a higher paying
job as a high school coach in Florida. ``I took a $900 pay cut and
left the beach to make $3,600 a year because Bobby sold me on the
power we could build up there,'' says Gibson, who went on to coach
Kansas State, Louisville and Tulane. He will play host to a party
for Bowden, the South Georgia team and their Birmingham friends in
New Orleans before the Sugar Bowl.


Bowden is tough.


In his second season, after South Georgia had lost its opener,
Bowden addressed his ``boys'' _ it didn't matter many were older
than him, he was the coach _ about rumors he had heard about their
breaking training. He asked them to raise their hands if it was
true. Seventeen hands went up _ 17 scholarships were taken away.


``The thing about Bobby is that he comes off as such a nice,
sweet Southern boy that people underestimate him,'' Gibson said.
``He's a tough guy and can be a hard one when he wants.''


Bowden is loyal.


Every year since, he has driven to Georgia for the reunion of
those teams. ``You go to those reunions,'' Gibson said, ``and you
got guys 65 years old who worship Bobby like a father.''


There were two more head coaching stops that shaped Bowden
before he arrived in Tallahassee in 1976. In 1959, he became head
coach at his alma mater _ Howard, now Samford University _ in
Birmingham. Down the road in Tuscaloosa, Bryant was in his second
year of building Alabama into a power. Bowden often made the
50-mile drive to watch and learn. He saw how the military principle
of reserves worked in football.


``I wasn't one of his guys, but he was cordial and helpful,''
Bowden said. ``He knew I could help him out. In those days, Coach
Bryant monopolized players because he had so many scholarships.
Each spring, he'd have an assistant coach walk me around the field
with a list of guys who weren't going to play much. They'd ask me
who I wanted and then they'd talk the boys into transferring to
us.''


Though Bowden went 31-6 in four years at Samford, he returned to
the assistant-coaching ranks _ including a stint at Florida State _
before being named coach of West Virginia in 1970. There, he went
42-26 over six seasons and learned a tough lesson: the game is a
business. After finishing 4-7 in 1974, some Mountaineer fans hanged
him in effigy.


``I'd probably still be there if that didn't happen,'' Bowden
said. ``It taught me people are fickle and you got to do what's
best for you.''


When Florida State called in 1976, Bowden was thinking short
term. Both his and Ann's mothers were widows in Birmingham, and
Tallahassee was just a six-hour drive. Besides, the coach thought
that sooner rather than later, Alabama or Auburn would be ready to
bring him home as a head coach.


``They didn't have facilities and the salary wasn't that
great,'' Ann Bowden said. ``Frankly, I thought Bobby was ready to
go to a big-time program.''


Instead Bobby Bowden built one. Warrick Dunn, Deion Sanders and
more than 40 other Seminoles are now in the National Football
League. In athlete-rich Florida, Bowden found the raw talent to
construct his football reserve. He went 5-6 his first season and
has not been under .500 since. The Seminoles have gone to bowl
games 18 straight years. Bowden has visited housing projects in
Miami and farms in the Florida panhandle in pursuit of players. He
can tick off recruiting adventures: the stoned grandfather who did
not move in his rocking chair, the baby sister who fell asleep in
his lap, the pecan pies a mama made in South Georgia.


``I like people,'' Bowden said of recruiting. ``I like meeting
their daddies and grandmas and visiting with them. It's not work at
all.''


And they like him _ so much so that they entrust him with their
kids.


Bowden concedes that his players do not drop into his office
just to talk as much as they used to. He attributes it to the
distance of generations and perhaps to the Bear-like status he has
earned across the South. But just like members of those South
Georgia teams, his current players idolize him. Still, when his
star wide receiver Peter Warrick was arrested in a shopping mall
scam, Bowden suspended him for two games before reinstating him
after he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor. Another wide receiver,
Laveranues Coles, was also involved and was kicked off the team.


``Laveranues had already been in trouble and I had warned him,''
Bowden said. ``It was Peter's first time. I got a lot of letters
wondering how I could allow Peter back. I wrote every one of them _
first I don't condone that behavior. Second, if that was your kid
and your life wouldn't you want him to have a second chance? And I
haven't heard back from any of them.''


Seminoles tight end Ryan Sprague said that those were the tenets
Bowden preached before football games. He said the pregame talks
are like church services: Bowden with his note cards is the pastor,
the players his congregation. The sermon is about life; the last
five minutes about the truisms of football. Hang on to the ball.
Don't arm-tackle.


Sprague, a junior, was a walk-on for the Seminoles and did not
have a conversation with his coach in his first two years. When
Bowden acknowledged him one afternoon with a pinch and a ``hey,
buddy,'' Sprague rushed home to call his parents. Even now, on
Bowden's Sunday highlight show, the coach misidentifies his
starting tight end.


``He's had me being from St. Augustine and from Savannah,'' said
Sprague, who is from Augusta, Ga. ``But when you think about all
the players he's had and all the history he's made, we're just a
wrinkle in time for him. He is who he is. He is the guy who runs
Florida State football and that means a whole lot to a bunch of
people.''


The coach spooning the soup on his sofa recently signed a
contract worth $1 million a year through 2004. As much as Bowden
likes watching TV, stroking the two cats that roam the house and
going to Europe to retrace the campaigns of history's great
generals, he likes being a coach more.


He enjoys signing all those footballs, breaking down films and
making all those notes. He is energized on Saturday nights in the
winter, when a fire is roaring and pool lights in the backyard are
on and he and Ann are having Florida State recruits and their
families at their home for dessert.


``He loves the television, the media, the recruiting the whole
package that is college football,'' Ann Bowden said. ``I think it
scares him to think this might be over.''


Bowden will continue to take naps so he can climb the Tower of
Power. He will continue to think football strategy all alone on his
golf cart on the practice field. He believes he will continue to
win. His reason is simple.


``When you retire, there is just one more big event,'' he said.
``And I ain't ready for that.''

