
By the time we crested the grassy knoll and
started down the logging road, Bianca, an 8-year-old German
shorthair retriever, looked thoroughly disgusted. She waited
patiently on the trail, ready to dive into the brush and search for
that singular and elusive game bird, woodcock. Her knitted brows
and tensed legs conveyed the question: What on earth is taking you
so long?


A satisfying answer to that question has never been rendered.
Still, it was not a day for doing anything hastily. The air was
simultaneously crisp and warm, and so still that the yellow leaves,
no longer able to cling to the boughs of the maple tree, fell as
slowly as snow. It was that perfect, unforgettable day that comes
along every now and then, even on the brink of a new century.


It was a day filled with wonder and color, in which intimations
of mortality and acute well-being were equally mixed. And I had the
pleasure of sharing it with one of the very few great woodsmen and
hunters I know, Paul de Nemeskeri-Kiss, who had the grace to give
his dog a more user-friendly name than his own.


Paul is 78 now, and in dog years I suppose Bianca is no spring
chicken, either. In fact, these days Paul can keep Bianca in
hunting form during the off-season only with the help of his wife,
Sophie. The three of them go to a park daily near their home in the
Riverdale section of New York City. Paul and Sophie take up
stations on park benches a few hundred yards apart, and Bianca runs
between them, collecting a tiny biscuit each time.


But it's different when Paul pulls on his wool tweed hunting
knickers, and knots the tie that he still insists on wearing in
this age of Thinsulate, Gore-Tex and casual Fridays. Then the years
fall away from Paul.


``Get the bird, Bianca,'' Paul called out. ``Where's the bird?''


Bianca's radio collar began to beep steadily, signaling that she
was on point. Using our shotguns like kayak paddles, we pushed
through the thicket of porcelain berry and wild rose that created
perfect woodcock cover.


The woodcock feeds exclusively on earthworms, digging them out
with a long, curved beak. The mottled brown bird blends perfectly
with the habitat in which it forages _ moist, damp bottom land
carpeted with twigs and leaves and free of grass. The woodcock
loves cover as dense and impenetrable as a ball of twine.


Unlike grouse or pheasant, woodcock won't flush, or fly off to
avoid danger, until the very last moment. They hold tight, trusting
their fate to the density of the cover, and their perfect
camouflage. On the wing, the birds fly like bottle rockets. So even
when you can swing a gun in all the thick scrub, your chances of
actually killing the bird are slim.


Paul and I approached Bianca, who was so torn between pointing
the bird (her job) and jumping on it (her desire) that she was
trembling. The woodcock burst into the air, right in front of my
nose, and I almost fell over as I twisted, turned, got the gun up
in plenty of time to realize I had no shot. Bianca gave me a look
of admonition. Paul merely chuckled.


``Let's stop here for a little rest,'' Paul said, shortly before
noon. We sat down on the stone wall of a long-abandoned farmstead.
Paul pushed back his long, silver hair and carefully unfolded a
paper napkin that contained a partly smoked cigarette. His watery
blue eyes twinkled as he smoked, and in his thick Hungarian accent
relived days of splendor and majesty in the great woods, the
Carpathian mountains of his native land.


Once, as a youth, he saw an enormous wolf in a high meadow.
Judging the distance as 300 yards, he compensated for the bullet
drop by holding his sights on a flower about a foot above the back
of the wolf. His subsequent shot missed the wolf but blew apart the
flower. Paul was so excited that he had misjudged the distance by
half. As hunting stories go, it was a good one.


We continued our hunt. We had slowed down some, but Paul's
exhortations were undiminished: ``Bianca! Where's the bird? ... Go
in there Bianca, you haven't been there yet .... Get the bird ....
Oh, Bianca, come on, there _ over there.''


We put up half a dozen woodcock, and missed every blessed one. I
finally managed to shoot a pheasant, a plump, stocked bird that had
none of the guile of a wild woodcock. But Bianca didn't mind that
at all. She had been working very hard for us without much
compensation.


We emerged into a rolling meadow, not far from where we left the
car. Bianca nosed around the edge of the field. ``She's not really
tired, she can keep going,'' Paul said. ``But me, I think I've had
enough.''


Suddenly, Bianca plunged into a patch of brush along the dirt
road, and went to point. ``Bianca,'' Paul called out. ``What are
you expecting to find there? There's no bird. There's no bird in
there anymore.''


We emptied our guns. The serene afternoon light was diminishing.
Reluctantly, Bianca came off point and a curious stillness
descended on our perfect day.

