
Distrust of ethnic strangers runs so deep in
Burundi that there is a special insult _ ``ikimenabanga'' _ for the
person within a group who says too much, the one who breaks the
secret. It is safer to stay quiet, to keep to one's own kind.


But there is a great distance between that kind of simple
suspicion and the hatreds that seem to have exploded in the last
decade with relentless regularity in Burundi, Rwanda and eastern
Congo _ the Great Lakes area of Africa. Documented genocide
occurred there in 1994, when Hutu extremists in Rwanda meticulously
slaughtered at least half a million ethnic Tutsi. The fighting
continued in the form of a rebellion within Rwanda and spilled into
Congo _ then known as Zaire _ helping to shatter that country in
1997. Burundi has been rent by civil warfare that started in 1993.


Today, Hutu fighters who fled Rwanda in 1994 are preying there
again, in a war that has dragged in at least eight other nations.
And in Burundi, Rwanda's southern twin, the Tutsi elite who rule
the country have herded into hillside camps 350,000 people, most of
them Hutu farmers, to separate them from Hutu guerrillas.


All of this fighting makes Africa's Great Lakes region one of
the most grim and complicated places on earth, one where
well-intentioned outsiders periodically wonder whether, and how,
they might step in to halt the violence. Each time, the question
comes down to this: Are these spasms of killing the result of old
hatreds, or are they grotesque products of political manipulation?


To many outsiders ``ancient tribal hatreds'' has been the
formula easiest to accept, since it lends a patina of logic to
indifference _ to saying that there is little that outsiders could
do, even if they were willing. That is a position that underlay the
outside world's inaction during the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.


But that is not what most experts on Africa say. The hatreds are
real, the experts say, but they are not ancient at all _ and are
not really different from ethnic conflicts anywhere else.


In broad outline, the conflicts in Africa are quite like those
in the Balkans: Ancient divisions, even animosities, exist, but it
takes a political elite to seize on them and transform them into
something far more violent as politicians seek power for
themselves.


``It certainly is not ancient ethnic or tribal hatred,'' said
Filip Reyntjens, a professor at the Universities of Antwerp and
Leuven and a leading scholar of the Great Lakes region. ``That is a
vision many Europeans and North Americans have because it is an
easy way to explain what happens in Africa.''


Scholars generally agree on the ethnic shape of the Great Lakes
before the colonists _ first Germans, then Belgians _ arrived in
the late 19th century. There were three distinct groups of people:
the Hutu, who tended to be farmers (more than 80 percent today);
the Tutsi, who arrived on the land later as nomads and tended to
raise cattle (about 15 percent); and the Twa, or pygmies (perhaps 1
percent). There were rivalries, even animosities, but none of the
episodes of ethnic killing that have scarred the recent past.


Except for the Twa _ who were truly discriminated against _ the
lines between Hutu and Tutsi were not always firm. The monarchies
in pre-colonial Rwanda and Burundi were led by Tutsi but high court
officials were often Hutu. Intermarriage was common, even if there
were tensions between ruler and ruled.


Along came the European colonists, who imposed their own ideas
about race and superiority, and tended to put one group officially
in power over the others. They preferred the Tutsi, who were viewed
as taller, thinner, smarter (and thus more like the Europeans).


``The Batutsi were meant to reign,'' wrote one Belgian
administrator in the 1920's, according to the French author Gerard
Prunier in his authoritative book on the genocide, ``The Rwanda
Crisis''(Columbia University Press, 1995). ``Their fine presence is
in itself enough to give them a great prestige vis-a-vis the
inferior races which surround. It is not surprising that those good
Bahutu, less intelligent, more simple, more spontaneous, more
trusting, have let themselves be enslaved without ever daring to
revolt.''


What the colonists did, said Alison Des Forges, a historian and
consultant for Human Rights Watch, ``was take this system that was
relatively fluid and turned it into something very rigid and
hierarchical.''


B Y the time the Belgians were preparing to withdraw from Rwanda
and Burundi in the late 1950s, many experts argue, the lines
between Hutu and Tutsi were firmly drawn, and resentment among the
Hutu was strong.


First, in Rwanda, Hutu clamoring for power killed many Tutsi in
1959; partly in response, the Tutsi elite in Burundi hardened their
control. (The Rwanda fighting also created a group of Tutsi exiles
whose children would become the guerrillas who took control in
1994.) In Burundi, a unifying figure, Prince Louis Rwagasore, arose
among the Tutsi but was assassinated in 1961.


(MORE)


nn

