
As the 1999 season fades into history, one thing becomes clear:
The rich have no problem getting richer. No one should be surprised
if the same cast of characters shows up for baseball's final four
in 2000.


But that's what many had thought before the 1995 season when the
Colorado Rockies made the National League playoffs and in 1997 when
the Florida Marlins stunned the world by ousting the Atlanta Braves
and then upsetting the Cleveland Indians in the World Series. With
those results, the traditional view of building a pennant winner
changed, perhaps forever.


Since that year, expansion means more than an infusion of cash
for existing clubs, which admittedly was a prime motivation for
placing major league franchises in Arizona and northern Florida.
Last season _ only their third _ the Diamondbacks won the NL West
by 14 games. You could see it coming.


Diamondbacks owner Jerry Colangelo _ Mr. Get Things Done Now of
the NBA _ made it happen by authorizing the kind of selective
spending that could bring a Cy Young winner like Randy Johnson to
the Valley of the Sun. He got a bargain. Arizona's determination to
have and build a new stadium helped create not only a powerful
backing but also a level of success that would cost more than $100
million in places like New York, Boston, Cleveland, or Atlanta.


Long-suffering East Coast fans and those in the have-not cities
have to realize that none of this was by accident. In Tampa Bay, a
last-place team in the AL East in 1999, the Devil Rays officially
have called a halt to the dog days of expansion in a manner similar
to Florida and Arizona. The Devil Rays have added powerful hitters
like Greg Vaughn, Vinny Castilla, and Gerald Williams to a lineup
that already includes Fred McGriff and Jose Canseco. No longer will
Tampa be known as Wade Boggs and a Cast of Unknowns. The 3,000-hit
man is now just part of the Devil Ray front office.


``We set a distinct five-year plan in place two years ago,''
says Tampa general manager Chuck LaMar, ``and we've been able to
stick to that plan. We told fans from the very start that we want
to be as competitive as we can be as quickly as we can be, but at
the same time not let that get in the way of long-term
development.''


The Devil Rays won 63 games in 1998 and 69 last season. Believe
it or not, that placed Tampa (132-192) fourth among the 14
expansion franchises after two years. Arizona is first (165-159),
followed by the 1961-62 Los Angeles Angels (156-167), and the
1969-70 Kansas City Royals (134-190). Among them, only the
Diamondbacks put together teams in the so-called ``Big Money Era''
when budgets, salaries, and the ballparks were everyday community
assets managed by corporate executives rather than baseball men.


If anything, modern owners seem to be more conservative than
their predecessors in terms of facing certain realities. But to put
together a franchise, make it grow and encompass all that is new
and fresh, puts more financial pressures on owners today than the
old guard ever felt.


Who recalls salary caps and revenue sharing, the issues that
nearly shut the game down in 1994-95? Does it even matter what
league Tampa or Arizona are in anymore? Their success helps the
league. If Tampa is successful, it will help erase the memory of
the mess the Marlins made of their championship team. If Arizona
can go all the way, it would help restore respect for the
franchises out West, which no longer can count on the Dodgers,
Giants, Marlins, or A's to lead the way.


Could Tampa Bay and Arizona meet in the World Series soon? It's
possible. Tampa Bay's signing of several veteran players helps, but
support for the Devil Rays dropped off after the first season, and
those are the people who must show up faithfully to make it all
work financially. Tampa Bay drew 1,696,294 in its second year after
attracting 2,261,158 in 1998.


``We went out and signed a couple of veteran players to make us
competitive next year,'' says LaMar. ``But overall this does not
change what we've done or what we're going to do in the future.


``For sure, attendance is not what we'd like it to be. But the
moves we made recently are strictly from our desire to improve the
club. We feel like the fans of Tampa Bay will come when we have a
winning product that can be more competitive on the field. Our job
is to bring a championship to the Tampa Bay area.''


The Devil Rays have a natural advantage and hope to exploit it.
Many players want to live year-round in a warm climate and Tampa
Bay enjoys the reputation as an ideal place to live, play, and
raise children. Arizonans say the same thing, although they
acknowledge that it does get very hot sometimes.


``All the veteran players feel that way,'' says LaMar. ``So many
of them who come here have deferred money, which allows us to go
out and get some of the players you've seen in the recent moves.
They like the area; they like raising their families here. We're
the only team in baseball that spring trains and plays their
baseball in the same city. Even for those who don't live here all
year it's pleasant to come here, rent a house on Feb. 15, and stay
in it all season. I think it's one of our advantages when it comes
to signing free agent players.''


In other baseball cities, the talk is of trades and free agent
signings. The same teams do figure to battle for the pennant. To be
realistic, Arizona probably won't be sneaking up on teams in the
National League in 2000. Tampa Bay has pitching problems and looks
more like an old-fashioned power-hitting Red Sox team of the 1970s
than a solid contender.


However, some positive impressions have been made.


``We won't forget what having Wade for the first two years meant
to us,'' says LaMar. ``The chase for 3,000 hits and his last
moments were as exciting as any of us will be involved with.
Especially since he ended it with a home run, before a hometown
crowd, and before his family. He'll do well as my assistant.


``But it's time to move on. We're a better team. But we have to
prove we're better.''

