
Was he describing New York or Sioux Falls?


The police reported only 14 arrests during the 26-hour Times
Square marathon, mostly for disorderly conduct and other minor
infractions. The authorities received an uncommonly steep 48 bomb
threats, including one targeting the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge,
though the mayor said all of them proved to be bogus. On a typical
day, the city gets about 16 bomb threats.


The magical moment arrived after a seemingly unending succession
of highly choreographed festivities that began at 6 a.m. Friday and
marked the hourly expiration of 1999 across the globe with puppets,
costumed dancers and carnival performers.


One minute before midnight, Dr. Mary Ann Hopkins, a surgeon
being honored for her work in war-ravaged countries as a volunteer
with Doctors Without Borders, pushed the button that sent a
half-ton Waterford crystal ball sliding down a flagpole atop One
Times Square. The specially composed ``Anthem for the Millennium''
blasted from the array of speakers lining a dozen square blocks.


As the illuminated globe touched down, that poignant numeral,
``2000,'' beckoned luminously. Fireworks exploded in the chilly sky
and three tons of confetti coated the crowd. Thousands of balloons
swirled lazily into space. An exultant roar of uncontained joy
erupted from the crowd that could be heard in Trenton.


Some 8,000 police officers were assigned to the blocks
encircling Times Square, about double the normal allotment, and
virtually every member of the police force was on duty somewhere,
some of them equipped with anthrax antidote kits in the event of a
biological attack. A mile-long, three-block wide patch of Midtown
was closed to traffic. Cars were searched, manhole covers welded
shut, trash receptacles whisked into storage.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


The most serious arrest was of a man from Saginaw, Mich.
Identified as George James, 29, he was discovered by police
officers in a parking garage on West 53rd Street walking around
with handcuffs. The officers had stepped into the garage to use the
bathroom. When they searched James' heavily lived-in van, they
found a raft of pornographic magazines and a loaded shotgun.


James, who works as a repair truck dispatcher for a cable
television company, was charged with several counts of illegal
possession of a weapon. The police said he told them that the
shotgun was for his own defense, and they said there was no
evidence that he intended to use it.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


There is always an untidy side to New Year's Eve _ the drunken
driving incidents, the barroom brawls _ and while this one was not
spared from such blemishes, neither was it inordinately marred by
them. Hospital emergency rooms in the city reported that activity
was generally quieter than normal. In New Jersey, fog and iced-over
roads did cause a spate of traffic accidents.


In Times Square, after the $7 million extravaganza finally
lapsed at 8 a.m. and the last red-eyed stragglers limped on their
way, sanitation crews driving their mechanical brooms whirred down
the avenues to scoop up innumerable flattened party hats and
noisemakers. By late morning, the city Sanitation Department
estimated that it had collected 34 tons of garbage, up from 21 tons
last year, and the cleanup was still going on. All of 103 workers
and 12 supervisors tackled the job, which was handled by 57 workers
and eight supervisors the year before.


For the most part, affability reigned throughout the region. The
first breath of new life was believed to have been taken at Sisters
of Charity Medical Center. Rebekah Yi was born at one second after
midnight, weighing 6 pounds 13 ounces. The parents, Yunmi Yi and
Chan Yi, are from Staten Island.


Scores of parties, large and small, persisted hours into the
beginning of 2000. Some paid major money to clink champagne glasses
and embrace, and some none at all.


A thunderous party at Grand Army Plaza in Brooklyn attracted
about 20,000 people who danced in the streets and watched their own
laser show and fireworks display. Some of the revelers, though,
were disappointed by pre-party suggestions that it would rival
Times Square in turnout.


Ted Field, the chairman of Interscope Communications and notable
for his trendier than trendy New Year's Eve bashes, resurrected the
infamous Studio 54 discotheque for a glittery party of 2,000 of his
dearest friends, most of them too young to remember when Studio 54
was Studio 54 rather than a cabaret theater. At midnight, champagne
flowed from the rafters as women adorned in silver bikini bottoms
and go-go boots gyrated to the beat of Prince's ``1999'' beneath a
12-foot disco ball.


A goodly number of city restaurants closed for the special
evening, springing their employees and owners for private
celebrations or personal seclusion. Others charged steep prices to
eat _ $1,000 at Le Cirque and $2,000 at Windows on the World.


Many of the stores and restaurants enveloping Times Square
closed because of the congestion and police barricades. The Stage
Deli, 10 blocks from the ball drop, closed for the first time in 62
years.


To a large extent, though, the region's citizens began the 2000s
with a pinch-me-it's-OK feel. Once they checked that no bomb had
exploded, they turned to whether the little things still worked _
the cell phone, the electricity, the precious cable TV. Was there
still hot water? Could you get gas for the car and a can of dog
food? Was the E train running?

