
Ronnie Lott spent nine years with the San Francisco 49ers and
earned a reputation as one of the best safeties ever to play the
game. No one was more fearless as a player, or more respected by
his peers. Quite simply, he helped change the fortunes of the
franchise, earning five Super Bowl rings.


Now, Lott says he is hoping to change the way the NFL Players
Association does business and is strongly considering a run to
replace its longtime executive director, Gene Upshaw.


If Lott does run, it will represent the first significant
challenge Upshaw has faced, because Lott is held in such high
esteem by many players. Before Lott agreed to be interviewed last
week, a small number of players from various teams were asked if
they would vote for him if he became a candidate. All said his
reputation for honesty alone would merit serious consideration.


Four Giants said they would strongly consider voting for Lott, a
future Hall of Famer. When asked why, one veteran said: ``The times
I've spoken to him, he has been nothing but a straight-up guy. He's
a legend. He's very honest. He'd get some votes in this locker room
for sure.''


And, most likely, in a lot of locker rooms.


Lott, now a pro football analyst for Fox, has flirted with the
idea of running for head of the union before, but decided against
it, feeling the time was not right. He is more serious about
running now, he said, because of his rising anger over what he
perceives to be the union's lack of dedication to nonstar players.


``That is supposed to be the main part of the job, looking out
for the interests of all players, not just star players,'' Lott
said. ``Whether it is Michael Irvin catching passes in Dallas, or
Olindo Mare kicking field goals in Miami, or Victor Green with the
Jets, everyone should have a say. The way it is now, that is not
the case.


``I think players are kept in the dark about issues on purpose.
That way the status quo is maintained. Gene and the NFL owners are
pretty comfortable with each other. I think owners like it that
way, because if the union is comfortable with the NFL, then the
union will never really push the league hard.''


The union's offices were closed last week. An NFLPA spokesman
did not return phone calls.


Lott is clearly not a fan of Upshaw and other leaders of the
union. In 1997 he filed a lawsuit against union leaders, arguing
that Players Inc., the NFLPA's marketing arm, stole the idea of the
Super Bowl players' party from him and former Oakland running back
Marcus Allen, who joined Lott in the suit. The case is set for
trial in May. The NFLPA has denied the claims.


Should Lott win the case and also beat Upshaw in an election, he
would be expected to donate any monetary judgments to charity in
order to avoid a conflict of interest.


Lott is exploring the exact procedure he would face in mounting
a challenge to Upshaw. For one thing, he would very likely need a
certain number of signatures from rank-and-file players on a
petition.


Upshaw has presided over the largest growth ever in NFL player
salaries, the average player now earning about $1 million a year.
Medical and pension benefits have also increased. Pro football has
also enjoyed labor peace for more than a decade, and thus there are
many players who think Upshaw is doing a more than creditable job.


Nevertheless, Lott said, the union's executive committee, the
small group of NFLPA officials who are instrumental in many key
decisions, needs reform. There should be term limits for executive
board members ``because the league is constantly changing,'' Lott
said. ``There is a tremendous amount of turnover among players. I
think you always need to have fresh faces on the executive
committee who bring fresh ideas.''


He added: ``I've had players say to me, `How can we get some of
those people out of the union?' And I always say, `You can't the
way the system is set up.' The system needs to be changed so people
aren't on the executive board five years or 10 years or longer. The
same should go for the executive director.''


Another complaint Lott said he had heard from players was the
general lack of guaranteed salaries. Football lags behind other
professional sports in that if a player signs for a four-year, $4
million salary, the entire amount is usually not guaranteed.


For lower-tier players the situation is worse, Lott said. Not
only are most of their base salaries not guaranteed, but their
signing bonuses are usually low, making these players expendable.
Lott wants to see this situation changed, though persuading owners
to guarantee salaries would be his most difficult challenge.


If Lott does attempt to become executive director, he will, in
the words of one veteran player, be a formidable opponent, and, if
he wins, a good leader. ``Ronnie is Ronnie,'' the player said.
``He's tough, and he would give Gene a good fight.''


nn

