
The Patriots' future will begin at approximately 4
o'clock Sunday afternoon. That is when the season will end with the
team 7-9 or 8-8. It's when coaches cross their fingers and hope for
the best. It's when players who have suddenly become free agents
begin to say goodbye to teammates and coaches.


``It's the way it's always been after a year like this,'' said
offensive coordinator Ernie Zampese. ``If you don't win, there's a
chance changes will be made. I think those of us who have been in
the game for this long understand it. I think we all understand it.
I think in this situation, I've never seen so much professionalism
from a staff of coaches. We spent the week preparing for this game.
We prepared to win the game. Anything that happens afterward, we'll
deal with.''


Zampese's future is very much in doubt. If coach Pete Carroll is
fired, obviously Zampese and the other coaches probably will go
with him. Given the problems with the offense, if Carroll is not
gone, Zampese could be.


At 63, Zampese said he has no intentions of retiring.


``No, I'd definitely like to continue,'' said Zampese. ``You
never know what can happen in this game. There's always a lot of
rumors that fly around. Sometimes they're true. Sometimes they're
not.''


Zampese has one more year left on his contract, and he said all
of the coaches have that cushion. Carroll has two years remaining
in what could be an escalating deal of five years at $5 million.
It's not known how much Carroll would pocket if he's fired or if
Robert Kraft left himself an out.


As for the players, the ones fans would like to see return
include Troy Brown, Shawn Jefferson, Tedy Bruschi, and Steve
Israel, all unrestricted free agents.


``After this game, you step out of the helmet and pads and into
a three-piece suit and wing-tip shoes, and that's what I'm gonna
have to do,'' said Jefferson. ``There's a lot of factors. I want to
play for a winning team and these guys in this locker room are
winners. It's hard to get away from that. I look forward to being
here.''


Said Brown, ``You never know what's going to happen. There are a
lot of guys who go and come in every year. When you see people who
go, it hurts you a little bit. There are always going to be guys
who leave. I'm anxious to see what's going to happen in free
agency. You'd like to be associated with winners.''


Safety Lawyer Milloy said he will have fulfilled his contractual
obligation with this game, then he will consider the Patriots'
offer until March 1, when he can become a free agent. He reiterated
he will not play for the Patriots if a franchise label is put on
him.


Israel would like to stay with the Patriots because he's
comfortable here, and he doesn't want to move his family. Bruschi
is on record as saying he's not looking to break the bank.


A look at what's ahead:


COACHES


The coach with the most security is strength coach Johnny
Parker, who signed a seven-year deal when Bill Parcells left for
New York. Most of the other coaches have deals that pay them
through next season. Zampese would appear to be gone regardless of
what happens to Carroll. Steve Sidwell may be retained because of
his success with the defense, although, naturally, if the Patriots
hire a new coach with complete power, the entire staff may be wiped
out. It'll be interesting to see whether longtime Patriots
assistant Dante Scarnecchia survives another regime. Scarnecchia
has served under Ron Meyer, Raymond Berry, Dick MacPherson,
Parcells, and Carroll. Defensive line coach Ray Hamilton also has a
Patriots background and could be retained.


QUARTERBACKS


Nothing should change with the threesome of Bledsoe, John
Friesz, and Michael Bishop. Friesz has another year remaining on
his two-year deal, while Bishop will be in the second year of a
three-year deal. Look for the Patriots to renegotiate Bledsoe's
deal to make it more cap friendly and free up some serious cap
space. Bledsoe's cap number is $8.66 million for next season and he
conceivably could sign a deal that could reduce that number by $3
million-$4 million.


RUNNING BACKS


This isn't exactly a stable position. Terry Allen needs 130
yards Sunday to gain 1,000, which would kick in big incentives. The
Patriots would keep Allen if he remains a bargain, but if he's
making too much money because of rollover incentives it may not be
worth their while. Rookie Kevin Faulk, before breaking his right
ankle, proved only that he can return kicks and punts and that he
can catch the football. He did not show he could carry the ball
20-25 times a game. The Patriots are now trying to see if Harold
Shaw can be a back for them down the road, but it would appear they
will either draft another back or sign a free agent (Baltimore's
Priest Holmes?). Despite optimism that Robert Edwards may be able
to return, it's not something the Patriots can count on for 2000.


WIDE RECEIVERS


When you have a drop-back passer who can't move, his receivers
must be able to get open. They must be of the highest quality.
Terry Glenn will be back. Despite the piling on while he's been
down, Glenn stayed healthy all season, and worked hard until he had
some personal issues. He's very competitive and is irked that
Marvin Harrison caught more balls than he did this year. The
Patriots have to make decisions on Brown and Jefferson. It does not
appear that both will be back, but one of them probably will be.
Second-year player Tony Simmons didn't step up. There's always
Vincent Brisby, who will make $1.5 million next season. Who knows
about Sean Morey?


TIGHT ENDS


The Patriots would be insane to even think about getting rid of
Ben Coates. There's nobody else who can replace him at a very
difficult position. A new offensive coordinator may feature him
again. Rod Rutledge made strides and showed he might be able to
catch the ball adequately, but with zone blitzes getting more
sophisticated, a team must have two very good tight ends.


OFFENSIVE LINEMEN


The most likely lineman to go is Zefross Moss, who will be in
the final year of his deal. He's due to earn $1 million, plus a
$100,00 roster bonus by March 1. The Patriots would have $450,000
of his signing bonus counted against the cap. Todd Rucci and Max
Lane would require too much of a salary cap hit to cut either
player. Both contracts run through 2002. It would cost the Patriots
about $1.7 million to part company with Rucci and about $1.9
million to part with Lane. That doesn't include some guaranteed
bonuses in both deals. The interesting one is Heath Irwin, who made
$429,000 in 1999. An unrestricted free agent, Irwin could get
decent money in the open market. It would appear the Patriots will
subtract at least one player, and perhaps two (Irwin), and add a
free agent at tackle or guard.


DEFENSIVE LINEMEN


It's not known how the defense will change, because it depends
on what the coaching staff will look like. If Sidwell remains,
there is a possibility the Patriots will move to a 3-4. Regardless,
the Patriots will seek a defensive lineman in the first or second
round knowing Henry Thomas is 36 years old and likely at the end of
his career and Chad Eaton needs some help in the middle. The
Patriots are trying to tie Chris Sullivan to a long-term deal that
is team-friendly. They also would like to do the same with Brandon
Mitchell and Ferric Collons. Willie McGinest is set at the end
position.


LINEBACKERS


Signing Bruschi will be a priority. The Patriots like the way he
plays, the attitude he brings, and the reasonable money he'll be
looking for when he represents himself in negotiations. If he
returns, the Patriots have four pretty decent linebackers with Ted
Johnson and Andy Katzenmoyer together for at least three more years
and Chris Slade back for two more. There's a growing sentiment to
get Vernon Crawford more playing time.


DEFENSIVE BACKS


Milloy is the top priority. Or is he? While the Patriots have
circled the wagons and made Milloy feel as if they'd sign him after
the season ended, the question is, should they let Milloy go and
re-sign their other unrestricted free agents? The recent pattern of
signing the big star and letting go the middle-range player hasn't
worked out in terms of depth. The Patriots already have a
cornerback making $50 million and they have another effective
corner, Israel, also up at the end of the year who won't come cheap
either. It seems the team wants to make a commitment to getting
Tebucky Jones on the field full time next season, but where? Could
Tony George handle Milloy's strong safety spot if Milloy leaves?


SPECIAL TEAMS


Despite missing two kicks that could have landed the Patriots in
the playoffs, the Patriots won't change Adam Vinatieri as the
kicker and will go with punter Lee Johnson again.

