
One of the happiest aspects of the Alvin Ailey
American Dance Theater winter season, which ends Sunday, has been
the performing.


Burnished to a glow by Judith Jamison and Masazumi Chaya,
longtime former Ailey dancers who are now, respectively, the
troupe's artistic director and associate artistic director, the
performers' high technical level and individuality were seen to
their best advantage in Hans van Manen's ``Polish Pieces'' on
Wednesday afternoon at City Center.


The piece, choreographed in 1995 and set to a driving score by
Gorecki, has 12 dancers crossing and recrossing the stage in
staggered lines and layered small groups. Three brief duets are
embedded in the flow of the dance, which ends with odd abruptness.
Kevin E. Boseman and Stephanie Powell were the playful,
space-gobbling young lovers of the first duet. The two that
followed were much more emotionally charged.


Bahiyah Sayyed and Glenn A. Sims seemed to burn the air around
them as the lovers of the second duet, she desperate,
crooked-limbed and clinging to his resolutely passive body. There
is a hint of resolution in the nobler third duet, danced with just
the right clarity and heroism by Uri Sands and Linda Caceres.


Staged by Mea Venana, ``Polish Pieces'' was greatly enhanced by
Keso Dekker's jewel-colored unitards and Joop Caboort's strong but
unobtrusive lighting. The elegant cast was completed by Asha
Thomas, Troy O'Neil Powell, Cheryl Ann Rowley, Amos J. Machanic
Jr., Briana Reed and Askia Swift.


Ulysses Dove's ``Episodes'' might have looked better had it not
followed Powell's bittersweet ``Ascension,'' a subtler jazz dance
to similarly propulsive music. Nine faceless dancers stride, dash
and slide across a variety of white-lighted diagonals on the dark
stage, the women tossing their long hair and pausing to slug the
men or leap into their arms.


Eventually it all comes to seem like a postmodernist version of
Jerome Robbins' ``Cage,'' a ballet about male-killing females. That
impression was heightened by the chill evil projected by Lynn
Barre, in a hard-dancing cast completed by Ms. Caceres, Ms. Thomas,
Sims, Benoit-Swan Pouffer, Kristofer Storey, Jeffrey Gerodias and
Swift.


The program was completed by Ailey's ``Revelations.''

