
Now that the Year 2000 has arrived around the world without
significant disruptions of power, transportation, commerce and
other activities dependent on computers, the question arises: Was
the threat of technology failure overstated, or was it all those
hundreds of billions of dollars that were spent to fix things that
prevented a catastrophe?


Most computer experts insist that the problem was a widespread
and major threat before work began. ``There was puffery by vendors
and some money was wasted, but these were real problems,'' said
Leon Kappelman, a University of North Texas associate professor of
business and co-chairman of the Society for Information
Management's Year 2000 Working Group.


Many also warned Saturday that significant problems could still
emerge in the months to come if less critical or less frequently
used computers, programs or microchips belatedly become confused.
And little of the world's vast array of financial and office
computing systems will face real-world Year 2000 conditions until
business resumes Monday.


``Probably 10 percent of the world's computer systems had a
workout at the gym this weekend, but 90 percent did not,'' said
Howard Rubin, chairman of the department of computer science at
Hunter College in New York and an international expert on the Year
2000 computer problem. ``The statistics say there's still got to be
something out there that's wrong. It'll take weeks, perhaps a full
year, to understand the full impact.''


Still, some computer experts, like William Wattenburg, who
developed an automated program to deal with Year 2000 flaws, were
saying the quiet rollover was predictable and that the dangers had
been wildly exaggerated.


And charges were flying Saturday from individuals who had
expected the worse.


``Why did we fall for this hype?'' a correspondent in an
Internet discussion group devoted to Year 2000 issues wrote
Saturday. ``I feel cheated, betrayed, misused, abused, deceived and
everything else!'' The note was signed, ``Gullible.''


Year 2000 project managers looking ahead to the start of normal
business on Monday warned that it was far too soon to relax.
Thousands of workers spent the early hours of Saturday retesting
systems needed for office operations once the holiday weekend ends.


The results constituted more good news. For instance, the
Securities Industry Association, a trade group, said Saturday that
the stock exchanges and support organizations had discovered and
quickly fixed glitches that caused ``1900'' to appear on some
printed forms.


But the overall good news was not being interpreted as evidence
that the huge precautionary investments had been unnecessary. ``Had
we not fixed our code and done the level of testing and gone out
and gotten outside auditors, we would definitely have had
failures,'' said Gary Davis, the Year 2000 director for New York
state, which spent about $270 million on the problem. ``There's a
whole laundry list of silver linings.''


For example, like most major computer users, New York ended up
doing a thorough inventory of the state's technological
underpinnings. ``Lots of our technology was 10 years old, some even
two decades old,'' Davis said. ``It all really needed upgrading and
now we're in a much better position to deliver better services to
New Yorkers.''


John A. Koskinen, chairman of the President's Council on Year
2000 Conversion, added his voice at a 2 a.m. press conference
Saturday to those denying that the United States had been chasing a
mirage rather than a real threat _ even though other nations that
spent far less seemed to encounter no significant difficulties.


Koskinen said that the United States, as the nation most
dependent on computers, needed to spend the most to avoid
disruptions. If the news remains good, he said, ``It will reflect
the success of a unique, massive cooperative effort.''


Computer experts said the United States had benefited in
numerous ways from its heavy spending _ pegged at $100 billion by
the government and several times that amount by some private
analysts. One of the most important ways, some said, was a
recognition by business and government leaders that computers and
software must be more carefully managed.


Rubin termed the rollover an ``extraordinary success'' after a
belated start working on Year 2000 programming flaws. But such slow
reactions may not be correctible in the future, he warned.


``When computers are in your face _ when you have an Internet
refrigerator _ you won't be able to take that kind of chance,'' he
said. ``Soon, Earth will have an Internet skin. This skin will be a
critical thing. As everything becomes more responsive in real time,
the technological risks get higher.''


Others said the investment laid the groundwork for some
fascinating case studies in technology management. Companies like
Delta Airlines, which expects to spend up to $120 million,
according to filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission,
made Year 2000 investments part of a broader deployment of new
technology that could give the company a competitive advantage in
the future, according to Kappelman.


Around the globe, government officials felt an obligation to
defend their spending as most computers and related systems
functioned well as the year changed.


``There is a certain sense of wry anticlimax out there,'' said
Michael Granatt, a director of the British government's millennium
center, as he listed a few of the glitches that came to light as
2000 dawned, including temporary breakdowns in fare collection
systems on trams in Sydney and Adelaide, Australia, and the failure
of a tide gauge in Porstmouth, England.


But he said it was important to acknowledge that the lack of
truly disastrous computer failures was not a fluke. ``Things don't
go right by accident,'' he said. ``They go right through proper
planning.''

