
Most of the presidential candidates gave the
citizens of New Hampshire a break last week, but not Republicans
Gary Bauer and Steve Forbes.


Bauer caused a stir in Manchester when he told reporters that
the Vermont Supreme Court's decision recognizing gay couples ``was
in some ways worse than terrorism.''


Bauer explained that the nation could survive terrorist attacks.
But he worried that the decision would lead to a breakdown of
traditional values.


Forbes met with three generations of the Shannon family in
Londonderry to tout his proposal to allow workers to invest their
payroll taxes in private retirement accounts.


The other candidates were not totally absent from New Hampshire,
which holds the first primary Feb. 1. There was no holiday from the
TV ads for Republicans George W. Bush and John McCain and Democrats
Bill Bradley and Al Gore.


New millennium brings new round of debates


Remember the complaints from other Republican candidates that
Bush was running a ``yellow rose garden'' campaign (a Texas twist
on the expression used to describe an incumbent president's use of
the White House Rose Garden in his re-election campaign)? They
wanted a shot at him in debates and Bush was refusing to
participate. He took part in three of them in short order in
December.


In January, everyone should get their fill of debates. As of
now, the Republicans will debate Thursday in New Hampshire, Friday
in South Carolina, Jan. 15 in Iowa and Jan. 26 in New Hampshire. In
addition, a Jan. 10 debate in Michigan will draw at least Forbes
and McCain. Bush will not attend.


Bush jumps into Web with AOL site on tax plan


Bush has joined Forbes and McCain in using the Internet to
advertise his campaign, offering to calculate for America Online
users how much they would save under his tax proposal.


AOL users see the interactive banner ads when they log on.
Clicking on another ad, viewers can read about Bush's position on
various issues. The ads also provide links to his Web site.


Bush has raised more than $160,000 through online contributions,
far less than Bradley and McCain, who each have raised more than $1
million.


Bundle up, guys: It's cold where you're going


The three Republican candidates atop the polls _ McCain, Bush
and Forbes _ will need plenty of warm clothes for January, much of
which will be spent in New Hampshire. McCain is planning 22 days of
campaign activity between Monday and Feb. 1, befitting the campaign
that has bypassed the Jan. 24 Iowa caucuses to make its stand in
New England. Bush will spend 14 or 15 days in the state, where he
trails McCain in polls. And Forbes will be in New Hampshire for 13
days. The magazine publisher is putting more emphasis on Iowa and
will be there all but one day between Jan. 11 and Jan. 24.


Udall's one-liners brighten McCain's campaign rallies


The late Morris Udall ran for president only once, in 1976. Yet
he left a wealth of one-liners, many of which McCain repeats at
campaign events. He always credits his fellow Arizonan.


A Udall sampler:


Udall goes into a barbershop in New Hampshire and says, ``Hi,
I'm Mo Udall and I'm running for president.'' The barber replies,
``Yeah, we were just laughing about that this morning.''


New Hampshire voters demand an unusual amount of face time
with the candidates. Udall, on that topic: Asked what he thought of
Mo Udall, an undecided voter said, ``I don't know. I've only met
him twice.''


GOP candidate plans raffle in opposition to gun control


A Republican congressional candidate in Illinois has devised an
innovative way to raise money and make a point. Dr. Michael Curtiss
is raffling off a .45-caliber handgun ($600 value) and a
semiautomatic rifle ($750 value). All it takes is $5.


Winners also will receive instruction ``in how to use the
weapons responsibly,'' according to a posting on Curtiss' Web site.
Curtiss notes that he ``has a genuine concern for the preservation
of 2nd Amendment Constitutional Rights.''


The raffle caught the attention of none other than G. Gordon
Liddy, Watergate burglar turned talk show host. Liddy ``applauded''
and endorsed Curtiss, who has two announced opponents.


Democratic incumbent Lane Evans is expected to seek re-election
in the 17th Congressional District, which borders Iowa.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

