
NATIONAL FORECAST


The pattern that has brought exceptionally dry weather to most
of the nation during the last several days will become more
unsettled this week as a series of fast-moving disturbances sweep
from the Western states across the Plains toward the Great Lakes
states. Most of the East will be unseasonably mild during the early
part of the week while chillier conditions begin to envelop the
West.


A broken band of snow and ice will fall to the north of a
low-pressure center as it moves from the central Great Lakes Sunday
morning to northern Maine early Monday. Farther south, mild breezes
from the southwest will send temperatures 10 to 20 degrees above
the seasonal average over a large area from the southern and
central Mississippi Valley to the Atlantic seaboard. Scattered
light showers will accompany the mild air from the Ohio Valley to
the interior Northeast.


Most of the Southeast will also be unusually warm. Sunshine will
be plentiful in southern Florida, while a mixture of sun and patchy
clouds prevails in most of the region. A band of clouds and a few
light showers will accompany a cool front as it moves toward the
lower Mississippi Valley.


Snow will be common along west-facing slopes from the
Northwestern states to the central Rockies as brisk high-level
winds import moist air from over the Pacific. Showers will linger
in the onshore winds near the Northwest coast. The Southwest will
be mainly dry although variable clouds and snow showers will occur
in the mountains of northern Arizona.


Focus: Forecasts


Advancements in weather forecasting in the years ahead will
likely be tied to the same factors that helped improve predictions
in the 20th century. During the 1900s, the advent of remote sensing
devices like satellites and radar helped to fill the gaps between
observation sites, allowing meteorologists to better define the
state of the atmosphere. These detailed observations, combined with
increasing processing power, led to steady improvements in computer
weather prediction, expanding the range of forecasting skill from
about 24 hours at mid-century to nearly a week at its end.

