
As the clock rolled into 2000 Saturday,
``Messiahcam'' was focused on the Golden Gate in the stone walls of
the Old City for those who believe the Messiah will return to walk
through the same passageway.


In the hours leading up to midnight on New Year's Eve into early
Saturday, the ``Messiahcam'' Web site, which can be found at
www.messiahcam.org or www.olivetree.org, was registering up to
3,000 hits every two hours.


Transmitting digital images of the Golden Gate every 30 seconds
via the Internet, the site got so busy around midnight that it kept
jamming.


So even if the Messiah had returned, the cyber-faithful might
not have been able to see it happen.


Christine Darg, president of Virginia-based Daystar
International, which she calls a ``multimedia Christian ministry,''
set up the site a year ago.


``We weren't expecting the Lord to come back at the stroke of
midnight,'' says Darg. ``The purpose of the site is to watch and
pray for the return of the Messiah whenever that might occur.''


But much of Darg's literature and her ministry builds the case
that specific signs _ such as the emergence of the State of Israel
in 1948 and its capture of East Jerusalem in 1967 _ are all divine
indications that the world is close to ``The End of Days,'' as the
time before the Second Coming is referred to in the apocalyptic
passages of the Book of Revelation.


The Second Coming is a profound belief and hope for Christians
of all denominations, but the relatively small group of believers
that attempts to define exactly when it will happen and takes the
apocalyptic imagery of the Bible literally has gotten substantial
media coverage amid all the millennial hype.


There were fears that the streets of Jerusalem would witness
mass suicides by apocalyptic groups, or that some extremist might
try to take violent action that would precipitate the ``war to end
all wars'' that Revelation foretells before the return of the
Messiah. Israeli security forces deported as many as 50 Christian
believers over the last months, and added 12,000 police and
military officers to patrol the streets.


None of these dire predictions happened. Instead, the night was
one of quiet prayer by Catholics from around the world from the
Garden of Gethsemane up into the olive groves where Jesus is
believed to have spent his last hours before his trial and
crucifixion. Nearby, in the Garden Tomb, Protestant believers
gathered for a night of song and prayer to usher in the new year.


Just past midnight Saturday, the Mount of Olives, which the
Golden Gate faces and where Christians believe Jesus ascended and
where the Scriptures say he will return _ was crawling with the
disappointed.


But they were all members of the media, not believers.


A small army of more than 100 reporters and photographers
searched everywhere for those Christian believers who follow
interpretations like Darg's that ``The End of Days'' is at hand.


The reporters flocked to the Golden Gate, the eastern gate of
the Old City, believed to be the one that Jesus might have walked
through, when an apparently deranged man named Richard was detained
by Israeli police for yelling wildly about ``the mark of the
beast'' and ``the end times'' and other fragments from Revelation.


Wayne Hilsden, pastor of Jerusalem's King of Kings Church, said,
``It seems like the reporters were almost upset that nothing
happened. But the only people who I ever heard talking about the
new year as the time of the return of the Messiah were on
television and in newspapers. You do not hear that in churches.
There's no theological basis for it.''


But, according to Gershom Gorenberg, a senior editor of the
Jerusalem Report and a specialist on millennialist movements, for
this small, potentially violent or self-desructive fringe, the dawn
of the millennium and the sense of failed expectations could lead
to rising frustration.


``Failed expectations are one of the most volatile points for
anyone who has seriously expected the end,'' said Gorenberg. ``So
they will be running into this disappointment over the whole year
and beyond. . . . The level of emotion now goes up one step, not
down.''

