
They begin NBA and NFL contests here with a
pregame invocation. They invite people of all faiths to lead,
including pastors, priests, and rabbis. And though officials for
the Charlotte Hornets and Carolina Panthers don't encourage a
certain type of prayer, they must approve all prayers beforehand.


The two pro sports venues here are as loud and raucous as any in
the country, but it isn't surprising that Leslie Matz, director of
entertainment and special events for the Panthers, says that no one
ever has objected to the invocations, the venues are
you-could-hear-a-pin-drop silent during the prayer, and patrons
consider it ``a nice touch'' to begin a game.


Surely, as they bow their heads and close their eyes, and the
intercessions sail off into the heavens, one message, intended or
not, stays with those proud Carolinians: Charlotte is rapidly
becoming a metropolis _ a diverse, cosmopolitan city capable of
standing tall and flexing its muscles with any major locale _ but
there is still a Bible Belt secure around its waist.


Or, as mayor Pat McCrory put it: ``I think it's a reflection of
us putting things in proper perspective. It's just a game, and
there are a lot bigger issues.''


In recent months, the games and the issues have blended here in
two separate stories, _ one a terribly tragic tale that has struck
a chord locally and nationally, prompting intercessions and
outcries across the country. Another is a bizarre,
movie-of-the-week-like story most folks here are glad is all but
over.


Two weeks ago, during what should have been one of the more
enjoyable times in the city's short history as a professional
sports town _ the Hornets being first in the NBA Central Division
for the first time in franchise history and the once-struggling
Panthers moving a step close to a possible NFL postseason berth _
both teams' feats were upstaged by stories off the field.


Former Panthers wide receiver Rae Carruth was apprehended in the
trunk of a Toyota Camry in a motel parking lot in Wildersville,
Tenn., some eight hours away from Charlotte and charged with
first-degree murder of his girlfriend. He was the first active NFL
player charged with murder.


The 1997 first-round draft pick had been out on $3 million bail
on charges stemming from the drive-by shooting of Cherica Adams,
who at the time was 6 1/2 months pregnant with a child DNA tests
proved is Carruth's. Prosecutors allege Carruth arranged to have
her killed.


When Adams, who reportedly called 911 and gave an account of the
shooting after taking four bullets to the neck, chest, and abdomen,
died Dec. 14, Carruth was supposed to turn himself in to
authorities. Instead, he fled, and three other men arrested for
taking part in the crime had their requests for bond revoked.


On Dec. 18 _ the day the Panthers beat the San Francisco 49ers
to keep their playoff hopes alive _ Adams's family buried its
24-year-old daughter. Her baby, a boy named Chancellor Lee Adams
who was delivered via caesarean section hours after the shooting,
remained in fair condition in a local hospital, and people in
Charlotte waited to see when Carruth would be returned.


Charlotte police brought him back one day later. Prosecutors
have said they plan to seek the death penalty against Carruth and
the other three. The Panthers waived him two days before the 49ers
game.


One local reporter called the Carruth story, ``the talk around
water coolers everywhere.'' Each day, reports on the tragedy led
the newscasts, dominated the front page of newspapers, and was the
hottest topic on radio talk shows.


But on the day before Carruth's return, the story got upstaged.


On that day, a Richland County, S.C., jury rejected a claim by a
woman who had accused George Shinn, owner of the Hornets, of having
sexually assaulted her.


While the ruling all but ended the year-long battle between
Shinn and Leslie Price, it probably came too late to salvage the
public image of a man who supposedly had pledged to conduct his
franchise with a demeanor consistent with the Bible Belt venue it
occupies.


Price, who reportedly met Shinn in a drug rehabilitation center
while she was receiving treatment and he was visiting a relative,
alleged he lured her to his home, grabbed her by the shoulders and
head, and forced her to perform oral sex Sept. 5, 1997.


Shinn, who in a separate incident was accused of having an
affair with a Hornets cheerleader (he and his wife have since
divorced), said the sex with Price was consensual.


The trial was broadcast on Court TV, and reportedly drew some of
the cable network's highest ratings ever.


And that's not surprising. Among the more poignant moments in
the trial: Reportedly, Shinn's attorney Bill Diehl, while sharply
criticizing his own client for his infidelity, asked if the sex
wasn't consensual, why didn't Price bite Shinn to stop the act.


His final words to jurors: ``If she ain't biting, she ain't
fighting.''


It's all magnified


Both stories reflect, in general terms, how senseless and
lawless a society can be, but they are magnified when they involve
sports figures, and occur at the same time in the same city. When
the city is one that boldly declares its eagerness to uphold
morality and family values, then it is further amplified.


These are not the first headlines to come out of here involving
sports figures who have run afoul of the law, but they are the most
eye-catching, and it will be interesting to see whether the folks
in this city _ which is trying to lure Major League Baseball _
continue their love affair with pro sports.


``One of the great questions continually asked here within
Charlotte is are we really a major league town,'' said Brad Kranz,
a talk show co-host on WBT radio, ``and that is really interesting
since we already have two major league teams.''


McCrory, who just got elected to his third term, answers phone
requests personally. He is as approachable as many other people in
city government, some of whom make home and cell phone numbers
readily available.


They are among the reasons the city is one of the nation's best
blends of big-city economics and small-town charm: With a
population that almost rivals Boston's (539,000), it is the
country's second-largest financial center and home of the largest
bank (Bank of America, which relocated from San Francisco) and
First Union (which relocated from Philadelphia).


Yet you still can park in the downtown government lots all day
for $1.50, and $20 still will buy a decent amount of groceries.
Religious programming dominates the FM radio dial. The local paper,
the Observer, reported that ``the faith community hopes to make
prayer as powerful a part of New Year's Eve as partying.''


Charlotte is one of several Southern cities that have aimed to
be a major player nationally. They have garnered professional
sports franchises during the late 1980s and early 1990s, and for
the most part, they have benefited from the exposure and national
status the teams bring.


Years ago, it would have been inconceivable to see professional
sports in Southern areas other than cosmopolitan cities like
Atlanta, Dallas, New Orleans, Houston, or Miami. Now, in addition
to Charlotte, there are franchises in Jacksonville, Orlando, Tampa,
and Raleigh, N.C., and minor league hockey franchises throughout an
area once known for minor league baseball.


``Actually, when we sought an NBA franchise, we were laughed at
and scorned by cities in the Northeast,'' said McCrory. ``One New
York newspaper writer said the only thing we would get is a
McDonald's franchise. This was totally unrealistic 12 years ago.''


But it did win an NBA expansion team, and for the first few
years of their existence the Hornets led the league in attendance.
The Panthers became the talk of the league by reaching the NFC
Championship game in their second year. Both have helped fuel the
city's image.


Similar fortunes were experienced by the Orlando Magic and
Jacksonville Jaguars. ``The basketball franchise, the Hornets, put
Charlotte on the map nationally,'' said McCrory. ``It has been a
large factor in the decision-making process of major corporations''
relocating to the area.


Maintaining its roots


But while it makes big strides as a national player, Charlotte
residents aim to make certain newcomers don't spoil the area's
charm, and most folks are made aware _ on no uncertain terms _ that
it is not New York or LA.


``A year or two ago, we had a Panther player who used to do
gyrations out on the field, and word got out that that's not what
we want here,'' said McCrory, who said he was referring to
Charlotte's Fred Lane. ``He hasn't done that since, and he's been
an outstanding person for this community.''


Carruth hired new representation last week, and one of his
lawyers said Thursday that Carruth will plead innocent and won't
try to move his trial out of Charlotte despite intense media
coverage.


``I have no questions in my mind that the citizens there will
wait and hear both sides of the issue, and that there are very good
people there,'' Carruth's lawyer, Kenneth Spaulding, said.


The day the jury in Price's suit ruled in Shinn's favor, he
received an ovation from the crowd at a Hornets game.


He said in a prepared statement: ``I am personally sorry for the
embarrassment that these absurd accusations caused my family,
friends, employees, and the people of Charlotte. We have all made
mistakes during our lifetime, and this is one I hope everyone will
allow me to put in the past.''


Will they?


Asked if the two stories will turn the city sour on pro sports,
McCrory said, ``I don't think the Rae Carruth (tragedy) has been a
factor at all. I think most people see that as one individual and
not a trend. If it became a trend, it would have a much more
negative impact.


``People see it as an isolated event, and football players do
not have as much name visibility or picture visibility.''


Panthers analyst and former NFL standout quarterback Roman
Gabriel agreed.


``I don't think so with the Carruth case,'' he said, adding that
the events were so unusual it has even surprised many in the
Panthers organization. ``Rae was aloof from teammates, he was
friendly but quiet, and he didn't have a lot of friends on the
team. A lot of players didn't know much about Rae.''


But Gabriel said the Shinn case served only to ``reinforce
opinions people already had'' about the owner.


That might not bode well for someone who hopes to move the
Hornets (who currently play near the airport) to a downtown arena.


``I hope it's not a specific trend. I would not separate a
sports franchise from a corporation or a politician,'' said McCrory
about Shinn.


``Charlotte has a norm that's been around for years in the
corporate world, and this community is actively known for being
very clean and ethical and having a caring commitment to community.


``That's a norm held at high standards for all corporations, and
it's not acceptable to break away from that norm. When you come
into our community you must know there are certain standards you
have to uphold. If not, the community will turn on you.''


The latest woes aren't the first for the city's pro athletes.
``The Panthers have had five first-round draft picks,'' said WBT
radio talk show co-host Richard Spiers, ``and three have been
arrested: Kerry Collins (DWI), Jason Peter (DWI), and Rae
Carruth.''


Then there's Panthers linebacker Kevin Greene's skirmish with an
assistant coach on the sideline a few years back.


The Hornets' move to acquire Derrick Coleman didn't go over well
here, in large part because of his checkered past, and because the
team let go of popular center Vlade Divac.


Before the season began, Coleman was involved in an automobile
accident in which he was said to be at fault. He and two passengers
were injured, including teammate Eldridge Recasner.


Yet such incidents may not reflect a problem in Charlotte but
rather may reflect issues in all of big-time professional sports.


``If you have 100 athletes, the chances that all of them will be
candidates for the priesthood is not good,'' said Krantz.


A societal problem?


Richard Lapchick, director of Northeastern's Center for the
Study of Sport in Society, said it is indicative of the ills of
society in general, something that can be seen in any profession
but is magnified in sports because of the high visibility of
athletes.


Indeed, the recent events in Charlotte would have created as
much a stir inside the Capital Beltway as in the Bible Belt. ``This
(Carruth matter) reveals an everyday problem, something which
happens in every city and every line of work. These are big
societal issues,'' said Lapchick.


But the exception is that Charlotte aims to make talk of
upholding standards more than lip service, and it expects the same
of others who come here. ``When the Panthers were started, the big
thing was, `We're going to be the class of the NFL,' '' said
Spiers. ``They said, `We're going to take people with character.'


``They made an effort to be the Dallas Cowboys incarnate, back
to the Tom Landry days. They went all out, but you could see the
bloom coming off the rose with the Kerry Collins thing. (in
addition to his DWI, Collins was called a racist by some
teammates.)''


``A lot of that is that the innocence is lost,'' said Krantz.
``They all loved the original Hornets and it didn't matter if they
lost. They loved Muggsy Bogues, and when he left it was `To hell
with the Hornets.' And the thing about Charlotte is that it's a
small-town big city, so when something happens, everyone and his
brother knows about it.''


Perhaps Gabriel summed it up best. ``This is the Bible Belt, and
they want a certain type of player who is top-notch,'' he said.
``But you and I know if you bring in 50 players, knowing what
players do . . . players will get in trouble. Just like people who
live in the so-called Bible Belt get in trouble.''

