
Mexicans, who feel that their history often leaves
them underestimated and misunderstood, were not very comfortable
being part of a global millennial celebration.


The government, to impart a sense that they were on the cusp of
technological progress, set up a four-screened television monitor
in Mexico City's central square to show the New Year arriving all
over the globe.


But as the hours wore on toward midnight, one hour after New
York's, it was a subdued and reluctant crowd that watched
celebrations in Cairo, Paris and Times Square.


Mexicans usually love a good party, but the advent of the 2000s
was just not very inspiring to them.


More than any other event, the advent of the 2000s reminded
Mexicans that they are part of an increasingly interconnected
world. To many, the reminder was unwelcome.


``It's as though they don't know their own country,'' Adriana
Diaz Romero, 16, a high school student, said of the authorities as
she pondered images of confetti-covered Americans and longed to
hear mariachi trumpets instead. ``I want to feel the heat and see
the never-ending disaster that is Mexico.''


The city government closed down Paseo de la Reforma, the main
boulevard through downtown, and staged a parade with swaying mambo
bands, mural-like floats and figures representing hallowed national
heroes on stilts and roller skates. But only a small, low-key crowd
turned out to see it, just as the crowd remained thin in the
central square.


In part, people were feeling the weight of their history. The
notion that the passing of time can well bring preordained
misfortune goes back many centuries here.


Also, many were not comfortable with such an unavoidably global
event. They are wary of entering a modern economic and cultural
competition against the whole world.


``Our economy is more and more oriented to satisfy global
economic interests,'' said Oscar Mendez, 54, a schoolteacher. ``We
can see that we are on our way into a worldwide economy, but we
also know that there are many differences between Mexico and the
strong countries.''


Instead of joining others' festivities by satellite, many in the
central square stopped to contemplate the stony, half-exposed
pyramid that was the center of the Aztec capital before the Spanish
arrived.


The haunting ruins of the 15th-century temple sit on one corner
of the square, sandwiched between the National Palace and the
cathedral, which Spanish conquerors purposely built on top of the
Aztec edifices.


``We are here to observe the same thing they observed: the
advance of time,'' said Carlos Contreras Sanchez, 68, a retiree, as
he peered at the ruins. ``It's the same party in a different
style.''


Mexicans are descended from a turbulent history that began not
one but nearly three millenniums ago with a civilization, the
Olmecs, that was fascinated with time and created early calendars
and writing.


To the nation's Aztec forebears the movement of time was the
prime factor determining the course of life. An Aztec's fate was
almost entirely determined by his or her birth date, and many days
were thought to bring inescapable bad luck.


The advent of the year 2000 brought out similar pessimism.


``I'm trying to think of it as a renovation,'' said Jose Luis
Razon, 38, a federal employee. ``I know I should be positive. But I
keep thinking of the pollution in this city, and the sorry state of
the economy.''


At least one political figure, in his New Year's resolution,
vowed to try to change his dark view of life. Adolfo Aguilar
Zinser, an independent federal senator, wrote in a column on Dec.
31, ``Our political life is filled with ridiculous turns of event
that should leave us dying of laughter.'' He pledged to make his
column funnier in the coming year.


President Ernesto Zedillo could see the struggles to come to
grips with a long past, and he tried to help. In place of a frothy
New Year's greeting, he turned his millennium address on Friday
evening into a sober history lesson.


``We are a country that measures its history not in years or
centuries but in millenniums,'' he said. After recounting the wars
and conquests Mexico has suffered, he added, ``Mexico has solid
foundations of unity, identity and hope.''


In a rare display of disrespect, Mexicans disapprovingly
whistled at Zedillo when he descended into the square from the
National Palace to shake hands in the crowd.


Just before midnight the people in the central square got what
they wanted. A 200-piece mariachi band, with every musician wearing
one of those impractical but distinctive sombreros, serenaded the
new year.

