
Just over two years ago, he secured for Kevin Garnett the
richest contract in professional sports history _ a $126 million
deal that helped stoke the flames of a labor war between players
and owners. Eric Fleisher was becoming such a feared power broker,
he even held a franchise hostage while inviting a bevy of
comparisons to David Falk, the shrewdest and best known of the
sports agents. Fleisher's clientele included Stephon Marbury, Joe
Smith and Al Harrington.


Today his company, Assist Sports Management, has been reduced to
being a bit-part player in the agent game. The most prominent
players he represents are journeyman Antoine Carr, Nets reserve
guard Sherman Douglas and Knicks reserve forward John Wallace.
Fleisher filed a lawsuit two weeks ago in New York state court in
Manhattan, naming 14 individual and four corporate defendants. In a
23-page complaint, Fleisher alleges that his former protege, Andrew
Miller, 10 players and Wilhelmina Models of New York engaged in a
scheme to defraud him out of his multimillion-dollar agency.
Fleisher is seeking more than $30 million in damages.


``Things have clearly turned around,'' Fleisher said last
Thursday. ``I try not to dwell on what's happened, but momentum is
a funny thing. It can change quickly.''


At the heart of his complaint, Fleisher alleges that Miller,
whom he hired as an unpaid intern in 1992 and who rose to be the
firm's president, betrayed him by secretly signing clients while
still employed by Assist, then left the firm last July, taking
Fleisher's impressive client base with him. Miller now works for
WSports, a division of Wilhelmina Models.


``The complaint has absolutely no merit,'' Miller said by
telephone last week. ``My lawyers intend to have it dismissed
immediately.''


Miller's lawyers have yet to file a motion to dismiss the
complaint, but Fleisher said they had asked for immediate
depositions and discovery.


Among Fleisher's more sensational claims is that the players
were lured away by promises of ``romantic liaisons'' with
unidentified Wilhelmina models.


``Everyone wants to know about the models; that's getting all
the attention,'' Fleisher said. ``But there's much more to this
than that. This says a lot about loyalty in this business. Clearly,
as you become more high profile, there's a competitive element
there. But this was from inside. This particularly hurts because it
was someone who I trusted.


``Obviously there's a financial component, but also an emotional
component to it. I'm very angry. This was a young kid who I brought
along.''


Fleisher has lost 16 clients to Miller's company, including
Garnett and Smith. But they are not defendants in the suit;
Fleisher said he had settled his differences with them out of
court. Marbury left Fleisher for Falk in late 1998. Among the 10
players named in the suit are Chauncey Billups, Harrington and
Tyronn Lue, a fact that has raised concerns at the office of the
players union.


``You don't want to be suing players; that's not good for
business,'' said Ron Klempner, a lawyer with the National
Basketball Players Association. ``Little good can come from that.
The repercussions down the road could be severe for him.'' But
Klempner added, ``Maybe he felt so wronged by what happened that
was the only way he felt he could go.''


None of the players who are being sued could be reached for
comment.


Fleisher said: ``When someone does something wrong, you have two
choices: look the other way or take action. The reality is, they
were under contract. Will it have potential future implications?
Yeah, it may. But it was something that needed to be done. Those
were all of the young clients that the business was geared toward
the next 10 to 12 years. When I look at it objectively, that was my
retirement.''


Fleisher, the son of the late union chief Larry Fleisher, is no
stranger to controversy. During the Garnett contract negotiations,
Fleisher told the Minnesota Timberwolves' owner, Glen Taylor, and
the general manager, Kevin McHale, that Garnett would not sign with
the franchise after the club divulged to the news media that
Fleisher and Garnett had turned down a $100 million offer. Fleisher
and his client were pilloried for turning down $15 million more
than the owner had paid for the franchise before finally getting
Taylor to fork over an extra $26 million.


Fleisher also engaged in a legal fight with a former partner _
his brother, Mark _ over the breakup of their business association.


nn

