
When he is asked about the fighting in
Grozny, Konstantin Kukhlovets shows the red splotch on his index
finger. The 24-year-old lieutenant said he was firing his machine
gun so furiously that he was scalded by the heat of the gun barrel.


Three of his men were wounded in a 10-minute firefight, and
Kukhlovets says his entire unit might have been annihilated if they
had tried to fight their way into the center of the city against
entrenched Chechen rebels.


``We have been fighting all over Chechnya, but Grozny is the
first place we have come across such intense resistance,'' he said
at this settlement, four miles southwest of the Chechen capital.
``The rebels have fortified their positions, and it is much harder
to fight inside a city.''


For the first three months of their military campaign, Russia
made short work of the militants. Russian forces raced through the
northern plains of Chechnya before seizing the lowlands to the
south.


Grozny, however, is different. The sprawling city has turned out
to be, once again, a deadly killing zone. The Russian soldiers have
made inroads, but still do not control the city center _ a fact
that could become a major challenge to Vladimir V. Putin, the newly
appointed acting president of Russia, whose current popularity is
based in large part on the reportedly low Russian casualties up to
now in Chechnya.


Under the division of war chores among Russian forces, the
Interior Ministry troops are charged with the thankless task of
clearing Grozny's apartments, alleyways and basements of rebels.
According to the official statistics, 21 Interior Ministry troops
have been killed in Grozny and 56 wounded in the last week, since
the military began its drive on the Chechen capital.


But senior Interior Ministry officials acknowledge that those
statistics understate the actual Russian losses. Russian troops are
officially counted as dead only when their bodies have been found
and identified. As the fighting has raged in Grozny's streets, the
Interior Ministry's actual losses have sometimes averaged 10 a day.


``The situation in Grozny is extremely difficult,'' said Valery
P. Zhuravel, the deputy commander of the Interior Ministry troops
in the region. ``The rebels have prepared many strongholds. The
militants are mainly in the center of the city, but they are able
to move around a lot.''


The street fighting is more than a military matter. The Kremlin
sold the war to the Russian public by insisting that Russian
casualties would be held to a minimum.


If the toll continues to mount, public support for the war _ and
for Putin _ may begin to wane. The prospect of a long war may be
one reason why Boris Yeltsin decided to retire now as president and
to organize early elections while Putin's ratings are still
relatively high.


In a chilly field near Alkhan-Yurt, the 21st Brigade does not
spend much time debating politics. The troops are mostly young
draftees who were quietly serving their tour of duty in Sofrino, a
small town near Moscow, when the fighting erupted in Chechnya.


They fought the rebels in Dagestan in August and were sent to
Chechnya in October. Chechnya was clear sailing, they said, until
Grozny. The fighting there weighs heavily on their minds. Part of
their unit is still engaged in house-to-house fighting in the city.
After they are withdrawn in a few days, many of the troops now
waiting their turn here will have to face the Grozny meat grinder.


``Our first real losses started when we entered Grozny,'' said
Aleksei G. Lyulin, a 20-year-old private from the Belgorod region.
``We have had many wounded.''


Pvt. Sergei Chigayev, a 19-year-old with rosy cheeks, chimed in
that he was afraid that he would soon end up in Grozny.


``Even going to a small village to look for firewood is scary,''
he said. ``You can see from the way the villagers stare at us that
they really don't want us here. But the idea of going to Grozny is
really frightening. We have had no special training for what we
have do there.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

