
What the Russian troops have to do in Grozny is certainly a
dangerous job. In Moscow, Russian spokesmen have promised that the
troops will not ``storm'' Grozny, an allusion to the first war in
Chechnya, when a Russian armor column zoomed into the center of the
city on New Year's Eve in 1994 and was quickly annihilated.
Instead, they assert, Russian troops are conducting a ``special
operation'' to take the city, implying that sophisticated tactics
are being used to keep Russian losses to a minimum.


In reality, Russian troops say they are involved in messy urban
warfare with heavily armed, experienced and motivated rebels.


These are the Russian tactics, as described by commanders and
soldiers here: First, Russian artillery and warplanes pound the
city, trying to stun and weaken the rebel resistance. Then the
Russian troops move in. A special ``rapid deployment team'' of
commandos leads the way. Interior Ministry troops come next,
followed by Russian tanks.


The soldiers surround a building. After it is sealed off, they
go from room to room, searching for rebels and arms. If the
Russians run into heavy resistance, they withdraw and call in
artillery and airstrikes.


Chechen paramilitaries commanded by Bislan Gantamirov, the
former mayor of Grozny _ who was convicted of embezzlement but
released from jail so that he could fight on the side of the
Kremlin _ are not in most of the heavy fighting, Kukhlovets said.
Despite Gantamirov's claims of battlefield prowess, it is the
Russian soldiers who play the main role.


The rebels, however, are not acting according to the Russian
script. Instead of running at the sound of Russian artillery, they
hide in Grozny's cellars and ride out the strikes. The artillery,
Russian troops conceded, generally destroys the upper stories, but
leaves the basements intact.


When the Russians return, the rebels shoot at them from
carefully fortified positions, nestled among the ruins of Grozny's
buildings and surrounded by sandbags. The militants are often
deployed in two-man teams.


Armed with automatic weapons and grenade launchers, they are
good shots. Kukhlovets said one rebel with a grenade launcher had
hit the driver of a Russian armored personnel carrier in the head.


The rebel fire is so deadly that it is usually too dangerous to
maneuver an armored personnel carrier through the city. The
militants generally evacuate their dead, so Russian troops often
have no idea of how many casualties they are inflicting on the
other side.


In a week of fighting, the Russian troops have seized most of
the northwestern part of the city. But the rebels still control
much of the city center. And even the northwestern area slips from
Russian control at night.


``At night anything that moves will be shot at,'' Kukhlovets
said. ``So nobody goes out at night, neither the rebels nor us. If
my soldiers have to go to the bathroom, I tell them to do it out
the window. The slightest movement is forbidden.''


Kukhlovets returned last week from Grozny. Apart from a slight
concussion, he was not hurt. Two other officers were killed in the
fighting.


Judging from his account, there is tough fighting ahead. If the
rebels' confidence has been shaken by Russian firepower, it was not
apparent to Kukhlovets' platoon. During one chilly night in Grozny,
the rebels taunted the Russian soldiers, yelling out from their
hiding places that ``Ivan'' and other ``Russian fools'' have come
to Grozny to die.

Editors:
	The following story is an added starter on The New York Times
front page. It will move in ``i'' category and will move by 5 p.m.
It replaces INDIA-HIJACK, which has been moved inside the paper.
	HIJACK-HOSTAGES (NEW DELHI, India) _ The hostages called the
hijacker dressed all in black by his nickname, Burger, and within
days of commandeering an Indian Airlines jet, he had the 178
passengers and 11 crew members, joining in for singing games and
joke-athons.
	Cut off as the hostages were, with even the sunlight shut out by
the drawn window covers, they thought the masked Burger was a nice
guy _ that is until Thursday morning, when he told them that they
would all be killed one by one because the Indian government had
refused to meet the hijackers' demands.
	By Celia Dugger.
	c.2000 N.Y. Times News Service
