
Sunday brings the final game of the New York Giants' regular
season, but there is little about this team that feels finished.
Uncertainty clouds the team picture even as hope still pervades it.


For the Giants, Sunday could bring an extraordinary confluence
of events that sends them to the NFL playoffs. Or, they could lose
for the sixth time in their last eight games, a bewildering
second-half collapse for a team that was in first place of its
conference at the season's midpoint.


The Giants could conclude the season with a victory over Dallas
Sunday and finish 8-8, or they could be defeated and hand Giants
coach Jim Fassel his first losing season.


Not that Fassel would celebrate a second consecutive .500
season.


``Yeah, 8-8 is better than 7-9,'' he said last week. ``But I'm
not happy with either one.''


The Giants could display the kind of character and mettle the
team's co-owner Wellington Mara called for in his uncommon address
to the players on Wednesday, and yet, even if they rout the Cowboys
Sunday, 15 or 20 current Giants might still be playing their last
game with the franchise because there are 20 players on the roster
who will become free agents.


It is a day that could be remembered as significant for the good
things that happened to the Giants, or a day remembered, tellingly,
as an example of the things that went wrong.


``I am watching everything very closely,'' Fassel said of
Sunday's game. ``It's true a lot of different scenarios can play
out. Every one means something to me.''


The scenario the Giants long for the most is the one that is
probably the least likely. How else to describe something that has
not happened in 52 years?


The Giants' only valid chance to make the playoffs begins with
an upset victory by the Arizona Cardinals in a 1 p.m. game at Green
Bay. Arizona, a franchise that had its origin in Chicago, has not
won in Green Bay since 1947.


But if these Cardinals, led by quarterback Jake Plummer, can add
another inexplicable game result to a season of unexplainable
outcomes, then the Giants need only defeat the Cowboys to earn the
final NFC wild card playoff berth.


Of course, the Cowboys have motivation, too, and it is not
affected by the score of the Cardinals-Packers game. A Dallas
victory over the Giants sends the Cowboys into the playoffs.


Since little about this day can be commonplace for the Giants,
there is one other scenario that extends their season: If the
Packers win, the Giants can still make the playoffs if they defeat
Dallas by 56 more points than the Packers' margin of victory over
Arizona.


Don't expect Fassel to be blitzing 10 men or throwing deep
passes on every down in an attempt to score 75 points.


``I'll do whatever is reasonable to get us into the playoffs,''
Fassel said. ``But some of those things aren't reasonable. You
wouldn't play a very good game. At that point in time, you just
take your medicine.''


Which is not to say the Giants will not play hard. Fassel, and
more importantly Mara, has demanded as much. And the coach said
that regardless of the outcome in Green Bay, he would be playing
all his regulars, including those who are injured, like running
back Joe Montgomery, who has a rib injury, and tight end Pete
Mitchell, who has a badly sprained ankle.


Fassel and the team's management will be making personnel
evaluations Sunday. Because the Giants have lost to Minnesota, St.
Louis, Indianapolis and twice to Washington _ all teams headed to
the playoffs _ the team leaders are becoming convinced they do not
have enough championship-level players on the roster.


``When you get in the off-season,'' Fassel said last week,
``that's the way you measure whether you want to keep this guy or
that guy. Is he going to help us win a championship? Not whether
he'll help us be 8-8. That's not the goal. If he can't help us win
a championship, then he doesn't have a place here.''


The Giants will face a number of off-season decisions on
pivotal, noteworthy players. Among the unrestricted free agents is
Phillippi Sparks, the team's starter at left cornerback since 1994.
Sparks may want more money than the Giants are willing to give him,
especially since he is likely to draw offers from other teams.


Sparks' backup, Conrad Hamilton, is also an unrestricted free
agent, as is left tackle Roman Oben. So is nickel linebacker Scott
Galyon, who may leave because he wants a chance to start elsewhere.


Galyon is a weakside linebacker, the position played by the
Giants' three-time Pro Bowler Jessie Armstead.


The Giants also have 11 restricted free agents, players who
other teams can bid on even if the Giants have the right to match
any offer. But it might be hard to hold on to all 11.


Running back Tiki Barber and safety Sam Garnes are the biggest
names on the restricted free-agent list. The Giants will find a way
to keep Garnes, and they will probably use their leverage in the
process to make it hard for other teams to lure Barber away.


Defensive tackle Christian Peter and linebackers Ryan Phillips
and Pete Monty are also restricted free agents. There is a chance
some team might take a shot at third-string quarterback Mike
Cherry, who is also a restricted free agent as soon as the season
ends.


And there are the more veteran players, who in the NFL world of
nonguaranteed contracts, could be cut loose. Defensive tackle
Robert Harris, right tackle Scott Gragg and tight end Howard Cross
could each face an unsettling off-season as the Giants sort out
their needs and what they can afford under a tight salary cap.


Then there is free safety Percy Ellsworth, a popular player and
the team's only real threat to intercept passes the last two
seasons. Ellsworth, another unrestricted free agent, probably will
not be pursued by the Giants this off-season because they made
safety Shaun Williams their first-round pick in 1998 and are paying
him accordingly. The Giants think that it is time for Williams to
get on the field.


``I try not to think about it, but it's a reality,'' Ellsworth
said, acknowledging that Sunday could be his last game with the
Giants. ``I'll just try to give them something good to remember me
by.''


In many ways, Sunday's game is trying to do the same thing for
the disjointed 1999-2000 Giants season.

