
Rain and chilly weather didn't keep thousands of
paradegoers from camping out Friday night for the 111th Tournament
of Roses.


Spirits were high among the street party crowd as they set up
for curbside seats for today's parade.


``I want to party all night,'' said Tyne Gaudielle, 15, of
Glendale, who spent the last night of the year along Colorado
Boulevard with a group of friends.


Whether they came for the partying or the parade, campers were
in for a long night. Rain continued into the evening and
temperatures were expected to dip down into the low 40s.


``Rain can't stop you from having fun,'' said Terry Teague, 29,
of Pomona.


The parade will begin at 8 a.m. and includes 54 floats, 25
marching bands, 26 equestrian units and three dignitary units.


By today, meteorologists said the sun would be out with high
temperatures in the mid 60s. History was on the side of a dry
parade as it hasn't rained on the parade in 45 years and only nine
times in 111 years.


Paradegoers took refuge in any way they could. Some set up
tents. Others crammed in doorways and under awnings. Many pulled
their tarps over their sleeping bags.


``This is uncomfortable but it's not unbearable,'' said Ron
Pangrac, 40, of San Jose.


Cynthia Belmonte took refuge from the rain in a shop doorway
with her family. The clan has spent New Year's Eve on Colorado
Boulevard for the past seven years. Belmonte, 23, of Montebello
enjoys the parade and the rowdiness the night before.


``You may sleep an hour or two but that's it,'' she said.
``There are too many distractions.''


Most paradegoers said they don't mind missing the sleep. That's
what New Year's Day is for, some said. They prefer to people watch,
make friends, play board games and chat with family members.


Many who said they usually stayed home New Year's Eve decided to
spend the night on the street in an effort to make the last night
of the millennium a memorable one.


Marc Angelucci of Westwood hadn't camped out for the Rose Parade
since he was a kid.


``This was a must because of the millennium. It's 2000,'' said
Angelucci, 31. ``I had to.''


The Rev. Rodney A. Hilpert has traveled to Pasadena from
Northern California with a youth group from his church for the past
15 years. Hilpert brings dozens of young people to help decorate
floats and spend the night along the parade route.


``Where else would you like to gather with 3 million of your
closest friends?'' said Hilpert, 53, of Placerville, Calif. ``I
wouldn't want to be anywhere else on New Year's Eve.''


For the first time, Carol Hernandez brought her family from
Temecula, Calif., to camp out and watch the parade. Because of the
cold and rain, the family camped in shifts Friday night.


``It's the millennium,'' said Hernandez, 39. ``We didn't want to
say when people asked us, where did you celebrate the millennium?,
that we were at home. We wanted to do something special.''

