
Annie Plummer, a housekeeper in Savannah, Ga., whose
single-minded campaign to distribute thousands of free dictionaries
to needy schoolchildren made her nationally known as ``The
Dictionary Lady,'' died Dec. 23 at her home. She was 63.


Ms. Plummer died of lung cancer, said Edward L. Ellis Jr.,
pastor of the First Bryan Baptist Church, of which she was a
member.


One morning in 1992, Ms. Plummer was struck by the fact that
pupils were empty-handed while walking to the Garrison Elementary
School in Savannah near where she lived.


No books.


It occurred to Ms. Plummer, who had been an outstanding student
in the late 1970s when she returned as an adult to complete her
education at the Richard Arnold Community School in Savannah, that
if these children were given a basic book like a dictionary, it
would help stimulate their interest in learning and could change
their lives.


Ms. Plummer started the project modestly when she used $50 of
her own money to buy 30 pocket dictionaries. Borrowing a slogan
from the United Negro College Fund, she painstakingly wrote in each
book: ``A mind is a terrible thing to waste. I challenge you not
to waste yours.''


She later told a reporter, ``I went to the corner and started
giving them out.''


A local newscaster publicized Ms. Plummer's efforts and soon she
began to receive donations. To raise more money for the project,
Ms. Plummer began selling Dictionary Lady T-shirts for $10 each and
helped organize a Dictionary Walkathon. Churches and community
organizations chipped in to buy and distribute still more
dictionaries.


A shrewd businesswoman, Ms. Plummer persuaded one dictionary
publisher to sell her a number of copies of the $5.95 book for just
65 cents each.


By 1995, Ms. Plummer's stated aim was to provide every
third-grade student in Savannah and surrounding Chatham County _
about 4,000 in all _ with a free dictionary.


She told a reporter that by 1996 her informal organization had
not only met that goal but had distributed more than 17,000 copies
of a paperback dictionary.


Gradually, the idea spread across the country. Ms. Plummer was
featured in articles in Southern Living and People magazines and
was visited and praised by well-known people like Gen. Norman
Schwarzkopf.


Susan Weiner, a former mayor of Savannah, said of Ms. Plummer:
``Here's a lady who didn't wait for government to do the job. Good
for her!''


To date, 32,800 books have been distributed, and now there are
at least six ``Dictionary Ladies'' heading similar drives in
communities around the country, including Detroit, Chicago and San
Diego. The program's Web site is:
http://savannahnow.com/community/dictionarylady/


The Dictionary Lady Foundation, which was incorporated in
Savannah in 1997, now provides guidance to branch organizations.
``We are hoping to get helpers in every town and school district
throughout the world,'' said Barbara Dorsey, Ms. Plummer's
daughter, who said she plans to continue her mother's work.


Annie Oneta Plummer was born on Oct. 17, 1936, in Sylvania, Ga.,
the fifth of 12 children of a truck driver and a housekeeper. She
was raised in Savannah and dropped out of school in the ninth grade
when she became a mother.


As a single parent seeking to provide for herself and her
daughter, Ms. Plummer went to work as a housekeeper. She soon
became involved in neighborhood campaigns like getting a traffic
light installed at a busy intersection.


Eventually Ms. Plummer returned to school, and she received her
diploma in 1978.


In addition to her daughter, who lives in Savannah, Ms. Plummer
is survived by a grandson.


Ms. Plummer was passionate about black history. In honor of her
vigorous lobbying, a bill to foster the teaching of black history
at state schools now before the Georgia House of Representatives
has been named ``HB 1492 _ Annie Plummer Act.''

