
Stars rained over the nation's capital on New
Year's eve as President Clinton ushered in the new year by lighting
a fuse that sent a thundering shower of brilliant white stars
cascading down the sides of the Washington Monument.


``Tonight, the torch passed to a new century of young
Americans,'' Clinton told the more than 200,000 people gathered on
the National Mall to ring in the Year 2000. ``Tonight, we celebrate
the change of centuries and the dawning of a new millennium.''


Amid tight security, the crowd enjoyed relatively balmy weather
_ the temperature was in the higher 30s _ and seemed unconcerned
about any terrorist threats.


Most of the crowd had gathered in front of the Lincoln Memorial
hours earlier to get good seats for the splashy, 3-hour ``America's
Millennium Gala,'' a live television program hosted by rapper Will
Smith.


The show included performances by singers Bono from the Irish
pop band U2, Tom Jones, Don McLean, opera singer Kathleen Battle,
country singers Kenny Rogers, Kathy Mattea and Trisha Yearwood,
``Ragtime'' star Brian Stokes Mitchell, and the cast from
Broadway's 25-member ``Stomp.''But the evening's most captivating
production began in the final half-hour of 1999.


Shortly before the midnight hour, Steven Spielberg presented his
18-minute film, ``Unfinished Journey,'' which was shown on three
55-foot high projection screens erected beside the reflecting pool.
As scenes of America's past were shown on the screens, U.S. poet
laureate Robert Pinsky, former laureate Rita Dove and author-poet
Maya Angelou read poems written for the film. An original musical
score by composer John Williams who conducted his own orchestration
accompanied the readings.


Following the film, the president addressed the crowd and the
American people.


Then, with just 20 seconds left before midnight, a group of
children standing at the west end of the Reflecting Pool in front
of the Lincoln Memorial lit the fuse that burned its way along the
length of the pool, ending at the base of the Washington Monument,
now surrounded by an elaborate scaffold because of refurbishing
work.


Then, at 11:59:50 p.m., 10 successive bursts of brilliant white
rained down the sides of the monument, each 55 feet above the one
before it, as the Mall revelers counted down the seconds to
midnight. At that moment, the entire monument exploded with a
stunning waterfall of white stars.


But the show wasn't over yet. After the final blast of stars, a
giant Ferris wheel rose 175 feet into the air behind the Lincoln
Memorial. With more than 500 stage lights, the circle of beams
formed a sun to blaze in the New Year.


(STORY COULD END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS.)


Earlier in the evening, the president and First Lady Hillary
Rodham Clinton hosted a glitzy White House dinner to honor
America's artists, inventors, scientists and scholars.


About 500 guests descended upon the White House for the
``Creator's Dinner,'' including such famous faces as Muhammad Ali,
Elizabeth Taylor and Robert De Niro.


After receiving the guests, the president toasted the crowd and
praised America's ``endless capacity to express freedom and
creativity.''


Some of the guests were seated outside in a heated tent in the
Rose Garden.


Only a select 320 people held invitations to sit with the
president and first lady in the East Room and State Dining Room
inside the White House.


Among those chosen to sit down with the Clintons were Ali,
Taylor, De Niro, opera divas Jessye Norman and Kathleen Battle,
historian Arthur Schlesinger, concert violinist Itzhak Perlman,
playwright Neil Simon, and actors Jack Nicholson and Mary Tyler
Moore. The tables, draped with velvet tablecloths, were set with
white china with a silver band. In the middle of each table was a
solid silver bowl filled with white Phalenopsis orchids, white
roses, white sparkle holly and crystal balls. Adorning each silver
bowl was a silver candlestick with white tapers.


Waited on by 160 butlers, diners feasted on beluga caviar,
lobster, foie gras and oyster velout, served with Sterling
Chardonnay, before moving on to the main course of truffle
marinated rack of lamb, roasted artichoke and pepper rogo't and
crispy garlic polenta served with Dehlinger Pinot Noir. The dinner
ended with a chocolate and champagne delight, served with Iron
Horse Brut champagne.


After the dinner, the Clintons and their guests traveled via
shuttle vans to the Lincoln Memorial for gala. After the show, the
first couple returned to the White House for another party with
about 1,000 guests that was expected to last until around 4 a.m.For
those revelers who make it, the White House party was scheduled to
end with breakfast ``a little before dawn,'' according to Toby
Graff, spokeswoman for the first lady.

