
As always, Boris Yeltsin picked his moment.


By choosing to resign on the last day of the old year, Yeltsin
guaranteed that almost all Russians would be deeply engaged in
celebrating the arrival of the new one, traditionally the day of
the biggest family feast here. Better than that, he acted at a time
of enormous political flux: the start of a protracted break in the
political year, and just 12 days after the election of a new
Parliament, where rival blocs have yet to solidify.


The advantage of acting in this political void is that Yeltsin
avoided the usual flurry of public discussion and political
sparring that would normally follow such a sensation. His
successor, Vladimir Putin, meanwhile, was able to dominate such
news programs as there were by making his trip to Chechnya.


Daily newspapers will not appear here for at least another four
days, because of the holidays. Television stations are mostly
running favorite old Soviet movies, New Year's entertainment
programs or concerts. Financial markets are closed. Many of
Yeltsin's political rivals are out of town or abroad.


Those who have not been heard from since Yeltsin's announcement
that he was stepping down include Grigory Yavlinsky, leader of the
liberal Yabloko party, and Yevgeny Primakov, the former prime
minister whose political bloc fared relatively poorly against the
supporters of Putin and other Yeltsin allies in last month's
elections.


Even when political life does shift into something resembling
second gear at midweek, many politicians and businessmen will still
be out of town. There is, after all, Orthodox Christmas to
celebrate on Jan. 7, not to mention, six days later, Old New Year,
as it is affectionately known in deference to the calendar that
operated before the 1917 revolution.


Thanks to feast days and weekends, many Russians will not work
until Jan. 14. Moscow's streets, jammed with traffic in the pre-New
Year's shopping rush, are deserted. One of the two main business
dailies, Kommersant, will not even appear until mid-January.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta, a widely read daily newspaper, will not
publish until Jan. 11.


All this means that Yeltsin's sudden and unchallenged transfer
of power to Putin will go mostly undiscussed in the usual political
forums for the bulk of the next two weeks. And Russians are free
meanwhile to indulge in their most beloved pastimes: gathering
around tables and discussing life, raising toasts and
philosophizing, walking through the tender winter air, dusted with
snowflakes, reveling in nature.


Around one Moscow table Saturday night, the very suggestion of
having to discuss Yeltsin and Putin prompted several guests into
loud declamations about their distaste for all politics.


``We've just been listening to a wonderful toast about how a few
troubles are an essential part of life, and that the most important
thing is our souls,'' cried Yevgeniya Melkonova, a homemaker.
``It's the first day of the year, and this isn't the day for
talking about politics.''


Yelena Strikovskaya cut in: ``Well, everybody in fact did talk
about it when it happened. It was unexpected, but we got used to it
quickly. There have already been so many resignations.''


The talk then turned to Putin. Like many Russians, Ms.
Strikovskaya heatedly criticized Putin for saying on television
last fall that Chechen terrorists should be wiped out, and using an
extremely crude slang expression. ``I just can't even hear about
politics,'' said one guest, Olga Maslova, 38, who works at a Moscow
television station. ``I understand that it's our duty to be
interested, that it's our future, for our children, and so on. But
I simply don't believe in any of those politicians.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


The view that Russian politicians are unscrupulous and corrupt
is widespread. Putin's first decree, officially exempting Yeltsin
from any future prosecution, is universally seen as an attempt by
the ex-president to protect not only himself, but his family and
close friends, several of whom amassed considerable wealth and
power during his eight years in the Kremlin.


Around this table, the decree was taken as an unavoidable fact
of life, and one that may not guarantee Yeltsin a future above the
law. Besides, one guest noted, the first act of Gerald Ford as
president was to pardon Richard Nixon, so there was, in his eyes at
least, a precedent.


Those Russian journalists who were heard from basically
reflected the national desire to relax and forget about the daily
grind of politics for a few days. Lena Berezinskaya, writing for
the online newspaper Vesti.Ru, noted that Yeltsin rarely took
offense at journalists, simply riding above the many bad things
they wrote about him. ``But how journalists hated him for quitting
on Dec. 31'' _ either because they had nowhere to air their
opinions, or because they had to work.

Saturday, January 01, 2000
	Editors
	The Hearst News Service will file the following for Sunday. If
you have questions, please call Chuck Lewis or Susie McBee at
202-298-6920.
	(The ``HNS'' tag appears in all sluglines.)
	WASHINGTON NEWS (``w'' category)
	Y2K-CZAR (Washington) _ (2dLd-Writethru to story that moved
earlier today) _ As the world glides smoothly into the new century,
the United States reports only a smattering of minor Y2K glitches,
but officials caution that problems could still crop up, especially
starting Monday. By JENNIFER CORBETT DOOREN.
