
The collection of modern churches alone is remarkable. Miller
got the ball rolling, when he persuaded the congregation of his
church, First Christian, to hire Eliel Saarinen to build its church
here in 1942. The result was one of the nation's first churches
with modern architecture.


Then came Eero Saarinen's 1964 North Christian Church, with a
sanctuary cupped in the structure like a chalice, topped by a
192-foot steeple with a delicate cross rising to the heavens. A
year later, Harry Weese built First Baptist Church, with steep
triangular shapes and a low, T-shaped entrance. In 1998 Gunnar
Birkerts' built St. Peter's Lutheran Church, with tall, thin walls
like fins and floor-to-ceiling windows.


The 1942 Eliel Saarinen church, the 1954 Eero Saarinen bank
building and his 1964 church, the 1965 Weese Baptist church, a 1960
school by John Carl Warnecke and Miller's own house, built in 1957
by Eero Saarinen with landscape architecture by Dan Kiley, are the
six buildings expected to comprise the application for National
Historic Landmark status.


A local preservation group, called Preserve to Enjoy, is
expected to file the application in January, and a decision is
expected this summer. If the landmark designation is granted, other
Columbus buildings may be added in the future.


The application is extremely unusual, Ms. Henry said, because it
violates two nearly ironclad rules at the landmark commission.


Typically, buildings must be a minimum of 50 years old, and the
group of Columbus buildings dates from 1942 to 1965. In the year
2000, even the 1960s can seem long ago, but the landmark commission
makes only rare exceptions.


In addition, the landmark commission seldom honors the work of
living architects, and the school's designer, Warnecke, is retired
but quite alive.


Still, the architects who built here are so notable that
exceptions may well be granted. ``They are very well-known modern
architects that will no doubt stand the test of time,'' Ms. Henry
said.


The Columbus application will focus on two areas: the important
modern architecture and the role of the Cummins Engine Foundation
in bringing it to this unlikely spot.


Miller, 90, has handed many architectural cares to his son, Will
Miller, chairman of what townspeople here simply call ``the Bank.''
That's Irwin Financial Corp., a local bank and mortgage company
with $2 billion in assets that early this century was the financial
backer of Cummins Engine.


``In a lot of ways, the architecture in Columbus has raised
standards across the board, not just in bricks and mortar,'' said
Will Miller, who like his father is an aficionado of modern
architecture. ``It is an example of Churchill's notion that first
we shape our buildings and thereafter they shape us.''


Remarkably, these Midwestern Medicis have managed to create such
an interesting collection of buildings that leading architects
clamor to design small-scale buildings here.


``It is nice to be in that selected group of architects to build
there,'' said Kevin Roche of Roche, Dinkeloo and Associates in
Hamden, Conn. He designed the 1970 post office, a 1973 Cummins
engine factory and the 1983 Cummins headquarters, along with some
additions and renovations. ``It is quite prestigious because you
are in the company of distinguished architects.''


He praised the move to try for National Historic Landmark
status. ``It is good for the buildings because it helps preserve
the buildings,'' Roche said.


There are fewer than 2,300 landmarks nationwide _ the program is
far more selective than the National Register of Historic Places,
which has about 70,000 listings. Landmark status can protect
historic buildings from alterations or demolition by requiring
reviews of any changes to the buildings if federal funds or permits
are involved.


A landmark listing would be an honor for both the city and the
architects. Louis D. Joyner, a Columbus architect who is helping
with the application, said, ``The National Historic Landmark
designation is just like winning the Academy Award.''

