
Sacha Lancaster didn't have to point to the reason the
Texas Longhorns imploded in a 27-6 loss to Arkansas in the 64th
Cotton Bowl on Saturday.


They pointed at each other.


``In the third quarter they started bickering _ 'You got this
guy, No, you got that guy,' `` the Arkansas defensive tackle said
in assessing what went wrong with the Longhorns offense.


``To tell you the truth, they were never out of the game until
that happened. We just started laughing. We pointed it out to them.
They got mad.''


They just didn't get even.


From the moment the Razorbacks narrowly avoided safeties on
back-to-back plays and turned a third-and-12 at the 1 into a
48-yard gain enroute to the go-ahead touchdown, momentum began
creeping Arkansas' way. When the Horns had to settle for a field on
the ensuing drive after getting a first-and-goal at the same 1-yard
line, it flat jumped on the Razorback's Winnebago.


Arkansas, an up and down team that had beaten Fiesta Bowl bound
Tennessee but lost to 3-8 Louisiana State this season, was up when
it counted most in the second half, scoring the last 17 points of
the game.


For the third-straight game, all losses, the Longhorn defense
played well but didn't get much help from its offensive
counterparts.


``We were inept on offense,'' Coach Mack Brown said. ``We
couldn't run the ball. When you can't run the ball, you can't
protect. It goes back to their guys whipping our guys.''


Texas (9-5) gave up eight sacks -- that's 20 in the last three
games -- and set school bowl record lows for average yards per rush
and net yards rushing and suffered through their worst rushing game
ever (minus-27 yards). It won't challenge the school-record low of
6 yards they set against Nebraska because bowl games don't count
toward school records.


That would be about their only break of the day.


Playing without four players, including team MVP and defensive
end Aaron Humphrey, Big 12 record-setting receiver Kwame Cavil, who
were suspended for unspecified rules violations this week, the
Horns proceeded to get beaten up physically as well. Quarterback
Major Applewhite injured his left knee trying to escape a rusher in
the third quarter and was helped to the sideline and carted off to
the lockerroom with what looked to be a serious injury. A school
spokesman said there was considerable swelling and he'll have a
magnetic resonance imaging test early this week. His status for
spring drills, which begin Feb. 21, is uncertain.


Special teams ace Terrol Dillon was also knocked out of action
early with ankle and thigh injuries and didn't return, though the
Horns' punt coverage didn't suffer.


With Applewhite gone, the job of trying to lead the Horns back
fell to freshman Chris Simms, who was promised only a series in
each half but who played most of the second half, completing 9 of
18 passes for 91 yards and leading the Horns offense to the
Arkansas 7 in the fourth quarter, only to throw four straight
incompletions.


Texas had gone into the game hoping to use more three- and
four-wide receiver offenses and to widen the split of their tight
ends to from one to three yards, all with the intent of spreading
out the Hogs' defense. But the loss of Cavil and an ankle injury to
backup flanker Jeremy Jones in practice Thursday caused offensive
coordinator Greg Davis to tweak the game plan. Texas didn't use the
spread as much, and Arkansas stopped the run and pressured
Applewhite.


Asked if all the Longhorns' offensive woes over the last 10
touchdownless quarters can be traced to the lack of a consistent
running game, Davis said, ``I don't think that's an
oversimplification.''


Early in the game the Horns came up short on third down. Though
they completed 4 of 6 passes on third-down in the first half, none
resulted in first downs. Davis said the Horns coaches pulled in the
reins to steady an offense missing Cavil, who had a hand in 33
percent of the Horns' passing yards this year.


``Early in the ballgame we wanted to settle them down, throw
without regard to down and distance,'' Davis said. ``We were trying
to settle them down and get them confidence.''


Jamel Thompson, who drove down to campus with Cavil three
Augusts ago when both were reporting as freshman, took his friend's
place. He had Cavil's number -- he wrote the numbers of his
suspended teammates on white tape on his shoes to let them know he
was thinking of them -- but didn't have his numbers, catching four
passes for 33 yards.


Redding, filling in for Humphrey at left end, had four tackles,
deflected a pass and had a sack, one of the Longhorns' three. The
Longhorn defense played admirably, holding Arkansas to only 127
yards and intercepting two passes. Freshman Cedric Cobbs, who
scored two touchdowns and was named the game's Outstanding
Offensive Player for his 15-carry, 98-yard performance, though it
should be noted that the Longhorns where obviously in trouble when
their deep snapper (Hunter McWilliams) was credited with twice as
many tackles (2) and their All-American defensive tackle (Casey
Hampton).


The Horn defense nearly turned the momentum of the game,
dropping Arkansas quarterback Clint Stoerner for a 2-yard loss that
the Horns thought was a safety -- in the post-game press conference
Brown looked up toward assistant Big 12 commissioner Donnie Duncan
in the back of the room and said, ``I can't talk about WAC
officials either, can I Donnie?'' Brown said. On the next play they
held Cobbs for no gain, forcing a third-and-12.


Horn cornerback Ervis Hill bit on a stick-and-go route -- with
receiver Anthony Lucas faking an eight-yard hitch and going deep --
and Stoerner led Lucas for a 48-yard gain. Six plays later Arkansas
scored to take a 10-3 lead.


Texas drove to the Arkansas 1 on its next drive, but designated
touchdown scorer Chris Robertson was stopped for no gain,
Applewhite completed an out pattern to Chad Stevens for no gain and
then Robertson was thrown for a 5-yard loss on a pitch left. Kris
Stockton added a 22-yard field goal, but the Horns lost any chance
at taking control.


Texas' pregame motivational slogan was hinged on a win on Jan. 1
for the Horns' 10th victory of the season and a spot in the top 10.
They even got that backwards -- instead of 1-10-10, they got
10-10-1 -- what their overall record falls to in 21 Cotton Bowl
appearances.


``They fought. We didn't fight _ we didn't fight as hard, put it
like that,'' said UT cornerback Ahmad Brooks. ``That's
embarrassing.''


``At the beginning of the season we said our motto was 'No
excuses,' no matter what got in our way,'' said senior fullback
Ricky Brown. ``We still stand behind it.''


Lancaster, his cheeks covered with greasepaint and his blond
hair braided, said he figured the Horns were ripe for the taking
when both squads attended a banquet last week.


``They showed our highlight films -- of course, their highlight
film was much longer _ and they were like, yeah, okay,'' he said.
``When ours was on, we all got crazy. We knew then their momentum
was not up to our level.''


``I don't know what happened,'' said UA safety Kenoy Kennedy,
``if they stayed out and partied or what. They just weren't in
it.''


Mark Wangrin writes for the Austin American-Statesman.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

