
The United States enters its 54th presidential
election year in a period of remarkable calm and great economic
prosperity, with dozens of other nations struggling to adapt
American political forms. Yet the American people question their
political system on one front after another.


Some of the challenges are overt. Former Sen. Bill Bradley, who
like Sen. John McCain has made condemning the campaign finance
system a major element of his presidential bid, says ``democracy is
a broken thermostat'' because of big contributions. Meanwhile, the
Reform Party squabbles but still stands as evidence that millions
of Americans reject the traditional structure.


But the most telling condemnation is passive. A majority (51
percent) of voting-age Americans chose not to vote in 1996, and 64
percent did not vote in 1998. Curtis Gans, an expert on voter
turnout, says that more than half the children in America live in
households where neither parent votes. Huge majorities tell
pollsters they are not paying attention to this year's campaign.


Similarly, it is getting harder to recruit able candidates to
run for office at a time of insatiable news media scrutiny and
incessant demands of fund raising. And savvy veterans drop out at a
high rate, especially from the moderate centers of the two parties.


These more fundamental questions and concerns about the way the
system works are generally shelved, or used themselves as fodder to
appeal to voters, as politicians and the press focus on the
nomination contests and the chances of Republicans capturing the
presidency or Democrats taking the House. The issues have been
building for decades, but come into special focus in 2000, after
the first presidential election since 1924 when a majority did not
vote.


The obstacles to participation have been thrown up by the
``system'' _ of politicians, consultants, interest groups and the
press _ just when legal barriers to registration and voting have
disappeared.


Some of the obstacles come from deliberate decisions. Some
television advertisements are really intended to drive down
turnout. Both parties have become highly skilled at drawing the
boundaries of congressional and legislative districts so that few
seats will be truly competitive. That preserves the careers of
incumbents.


One way of looking at these trends was offered by Theda Skocpol,
professor of government and sociology at Harvard. Ms. Skocpol says
politicians use the information age to locate and ``compete over a
very narrow slice of swing voters.''


At the same time, what she calls ``an oligarchy'' of interests
uses expertise, lobbyists and campaign contributions to achieve its
ends with government, ``rather than by mobilizing large numbers of
their fellow citizens into a competitive electoral force.''


Some of the old ways of involving citizens have died out, as
politicians get their messages out through television and direct
mail. Door-to-door canvassing does live on in Iowa and New
Hampshire, but almost as museum pieces.


Anne Wexler, an antiwar advocate in the 1960s and a Carter aide
in the '70s who runs a public relations firm here, observed that in
the nation's capital, where people do care about politics, neither
Bradley, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas nor Vice President Al Gore
has a headquarters where an interested citizen could volunteer to,
say, stuff envelopes. Writing a check is the only participation
welcomed.


But even more serious may be the way the system is portrayed _
fairly and unfairly, by itself and by the news media.


Any veteran observer of Congress, for example, would say that
the typical member today is better educated and harder-working than
whoever held the seat 35 years ago, and at the same time less
likely to be a drunk or a womanizer, or to take bribes. Yet
consumers of a press that rarely covered those weaknesses before
and covers them now as regular matters have an opposite set of
impressions.


Gans, who heads the Committee for the Study of the American
Electorate, blames consultants for ``the conduct of campaigns,
especially at the end, in 30-second attack ads that vilify all the
candidates and create a miasma over the political system and invite
people not to vote for particular candidates and not to vote at
all.''


John C. Danforth, who retired as a senator from Missouri after
18 years in 1994 to practice law in St. Louis, and insists he did
not ``go away mad,'' says he is struck by how much Congress now
seems to be wholly involved in ``partisan combat,'' not
legislating.


Danforth speculated that an influx of Republicans who had been
``treated like dogs'' by House Democrats led to the change, as they
saw a chance to get even and scorned ``anyone who tried to do
anything on a bipartisan basis,'' like his late Republican
colleague, John H. Chafee of Rhode Island.


The bitter partisan tone in Washington not only discourages
potential congressional candidates who may be used to amiable state
legislatures, it turns off voters, too.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


That effect was sketched by a knowledgeable ex-Washingtonian,
Nancy Sinnott Dwight. In the early 1980s, Mrs. Dwight ran the
National Republican Congressional Committee here. Then she married
and moved to Lyme, N.H., where every four years she gets a lot of
politics to watch.


As she hears candidates, she is struck by this year's supply of
``terrific ideas.'' But she says that the atmosphere in Washington
leads voters to brush off these ideas because they think there is
``too much paralysis.''


``The system can't seem to get things done,'' Mrs. Dwight said.
A voter can download a good idea off the Web, she said, but does
not believe a candidate can make it happen in Washington.


No examination of the last session of Congress, for example,
would challenge those doubts.


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


(MORE)


nn

