
While much of the world partied and played, the
people of Jerusalem prayed their way into the year 2000.


At midnight, hundreds of hymn-singing and arm-waving Christians
gathered in the Garden Tomb, one of two Jerusalem shrines that
claim to be the site of Jesus Christ's tomb.


``We're hanging out in a graveyard, while others hang out in
Times Square,'' said the Rev. Wayne Hilsden, pastor of the King of
Kings Assembly, an evangelical congregation in Jerusalem. ``They'll
wake up with a hangover. We'll wake up redeemed in the Lord.''


As firecrackers and louder explosives crackled and flashed at
nearby Damascus Gate, the outdoor congregation sang spirited
choruses of ``this year in Jerusalem, may your spirit descend.''


While the messianic spirit may have descended, there were no
immediate sightings of the actual Messiah atop the Mount of Olives,
where many Christians predict Jesus will someday return to Earth.


``If the Messiah would have returned, it would have been neat to
see him go through the Golden Gate,'' said Jim Peters, a
candlemaker from Wausau, Wis., referring to the now-blocked portal
through which some believe Christ will approach the Temple Mount.


Peters, who said he spent $2,500 just to be on the Mount of
Olives at midnight, comforted himself with this thought: ``Jesus
needs to come through the heart,'' he said, ``not the gate.''


More than 2,500 pilgrims and local Catholics attended a Roman
Catholic service at the Church of All Nations in the Garden of
Gethsemane, followed by a candlelight procession up the Mount of
Olives.


In an extraordinary set of calendrical coincidences, Friday was
the last day of the Christian 1900s, the final Friday of the
Islamic month of Ramadan and the beginning of the weekly Jewish
Sabbath, which shuts down the Holy City like nowhere else on Earth.


Jerusalem is famous for its amazing juxtaposition of faiths and
feelings. Islamic women covered in traditional dress rub shoulders
with American tourists in shorts and Hassidic Jews wearing the same
black hats and long coats that their grandfathers donned in the
19th century.


Friday, as hundreds of thousands of Muslims chanted and bowed
around the Dome of the Rock, everyday life went on in the Jewish
Quarter, just a stone's throw below.


Outside a rooftop cafe overlooking the packed Islamic shrine, a
violinist played a mournful version of the Frank Sinatra hit song
``My Way.'' And if that wasn't enough, noontime church bells began
ringing in the year 2000 of the Christian calendar.


Tom Jacobson, a tourist from Rohnert Park, sat dumbfounded in
the cafe, wondering whether to believe his eyes and ears.


``I have never seen anything like this in my life,'' said
Jacobson, an associate professor in environmental studies at Sonoma
State University. ``This morning, I was at the Lion's Gate watching
this sea of humanity walk up to the Dome of the Rock. It was
mesmerizing. It just flowed.''


Also on hand in the narrow streets of the walled city were
thousands of heavily armed Israeli soldiers, police and special
security forces. About 7,000 officers and 5,000 police volunteers
were on the New Year's Eve night shift _ more than four times the
usual number.


Security was especially tight at checkpoints into the prosperous
Jewish Quarter and the Western Wall, or Wailing Wall, where Jews
gather for prayer.


The eve of the year 2000 was not a particularly big deal in this
town of three calendars and three major faiths, with Christianity
the smallest of the three.


For Christians, Friday was December 31, 1999. For Muslims, it
was Ramadan 23, 1420. For Jews, it was Tevet 22, 5760.


``We are very used to counting the years,'' said Amnon Lipkin
Shachak, the Israel minister of tourism. ``We are in our sixth
millennium.''


More significantly, New Year's Eve fell in the middle of
Shabbat, the Jewish Sabbath, which runs from sundown Friday to
sundown Saturday, and the Orthodox rabbis and religious political
parties who have enormous power in Jerusalem issued stern warnings
to observe the Sabbath.


There were no big public events scheduled in Jerusalem last
night, and the city's Religious Council and Chief Rabbinate
threatened to withdraw the kashrut certificates from any major
hotels that had music or parties last night. Those certificates
verify that a hotel's food and kitchens are kosher, and are
essential for doing business in the Holy City.


The low-key celebration was due in part to stringent Israeli
efforts to keep believers in apocalyptic endings at bay. In recent
weeks, Israel deported evangelical Christians who it feared could
cause trouble, and Friday, it tightened security around its
national park at Megiddo, just off the highway that connects the
ancient Roman city of Caesarea to the southern tip of the Sea of
Galilee.


Megiddo is the site mentioned in the apocalyptic Book of
Revelation for the Biblical doomsday battle of Armageddon, and it
is a growing source of fascination for evangelicals focused on
``end times'' theology.


Although there are no churches at the site, approximately
170,000 Christian pilgrims visit the hill of Megiddo each year, and
authorities were afraid that Christian extremist groups might
target the area, or that a suicide cult might go there to usher in
the new year.


Not far from Megiddo, Angelita Galvan-Freeman, a Roman Catholic
pilgrim from Southern California, planned a New Year's Eve sail on
the Sea of Galilee, on a wooden boat not unlike one Jesus would
have used 2,000 years ago.


Her New Year's prayer is that Christians, Muslims and Jews will
find common ground in the millennium ahead.


``We started as one people,'' she said, ``and we have to get
back to that root from which we all came.''


tag Chronicle correspondent Tom Zoellner contributed to this
report from the Mount of Olives.

