
For much of the American public, the 2000 election for the White
House starts at the beginning of January. The holidays have passed
and in a presidential election year that means that the country is
ready to attend to what the candidates are doing and saying.


Or rather, done and said. The truth is that most people are
tuning in rather late. In all likelihood, the Democratic and
Republican contests will be settled in just nine weeks, if not by
the first week of February.


Since 1976, more and more states have inched their primaries
back to the starting line, competing to assure their influence over
the nominee. It has been a haphazard process, following no grand
plan of either party, if countenanced by some Republican and
Democratic leaders who believe that avoiding an intramural primary
struggle is the recipe for a strong general election nominee. The
result, though, is that nearly 75 percent of the delegates will be
chosen by the middle of March, even as the primaries continue
through June 6.


But is that progress? As the primary season begins in earnest,
there seems to be a consensus among political leaders and academics
that it is not: that this constant tinkering with the political
calendar has produced the opposite of what had been intended.


Instead of a nominating process that engages voters, the
ever-shortening calendar is more apt to disenfranchise them, with
its early finish and narrow window within which to consider the
candidates. Instead of assuring big states a big voice in the final
nominee, the calendar dilutes their influence, since so many of
them have crowded their primaries onto the same two early Tuesdays.


And, instead of producing formidable general election
standard-bearers, the process turns out nominees who might, come
the tumult of the fall campaign, wish they had devoted more time to
what is the political equivalent of spring training.


``People are being rushed to judgment,'' said William Galvin,
the Massachusetts secretary of state and the chairman of the
Committee on Presidential Primaries of the National Association of
Secretaries of State. ``It's become a candidate death watch,
instead of an effort at finding out who these people are.''


Consider this: well before January, a series of presumably
credible candidates for president _ among them, former Tennessee
Gov. Lamar Alexander and and former Transportation Secretary
Elizabeth Dole _ had already quit the race, largely because they
could not figure out how to surmount the political calendar. The
exhausting schedule of cross-country primaries that awaits the
field on March 7 and March 14 has put a premium on the
candidate-as-fund-raiser, in order to raise the money to finance
travel and multistate advertising.


Inevitably, that suffocates the long-shot candidate, like Paul
Tsongas in 1992 or Bruce Babbitt in 1988, who had once put
excitement into American politics.


Candidates are, of course, supposed to drop out if they do badly
in New Hampshire and Iowa. But not to even make it to the startling
line? ``This is the first year that I can remember where a whole
lot of candidates dropped out before a single vote was cast,'' said
William G. Mayer, a professor of political science at Northeast
University and co-author of ``The Modern Politics of Presidential
Selection.''


Iowans and New Hampshirites, long used to being the first judges
of candidates' credentials and ideas, may be excused for feeling a
little rushed. As big states have shouldered to the front of the
primary line, New Hampshire and Iowa have edged back to protect
their historic first-in-the-nation status. The New Hampshire
primary is now Feb. 1, or 20 days earlier than it was in 1996, a
long time in retail politics.


Political campaigns remain engaging and meaningful to many
Americans in part because voters are so unpredictable _ especially
in New Hampshire and Iowa. That said, most analysts believe the
nominees will be known by the close-of-polls on March 7, by which
time 43 percent of the elected Republican delegates and 37 percent
of the Democratic delegates will have been selected. And if not
then, certainly by the following week.


``It's like 75 percent of the delegates have been selected by
the middle of March, which is faster than last time,'' said Barbara
Norrander, professor of political science at the University of
Arizona. ``And last time it was faster than the time before.''


Indeed, it is conceivable that the race could be over on Feb. 1,
especially on the Republican side. If Sen. John McCain fails to
defeat Texas Gov. George W. Bush in New Hampshire, after waging a
spirited campaign there, his own supporters have trouble seeing how
he could survive.


Similarly, a number of Democrats question how long former Sen.
Bill Bradley can continue if he does not make a strong showing
against Vice President Al Gore there (presumably a victory, though
a near-victory has done the trick for candidates in the past).


McCain and Bradley are both examples of the type of candidates
who have historically flourished in New Hampshire: slightly
insurgent and underfunded. But even if both should win there, the
calendar works against them pushing on to the nomination.


There are no Democratic primaries until March 7, but there are
16 contests on that day, from New York to California. It is worse
for McCain. Before March 7, he faces contests in South Carolina,
Arizona and Michigan. That schedule could not be more problematic
for an underfunded candidate running outside of the establishment.
Nor could it be more accommodating for Bush, who spent much of last
year raising money to prepare himself precisely for this moment.


(MORE)


nn

