
Dr. Janet Mouradian, a surgical pathologist at Cornell Medical
Center and a most unlikely denizen of Times Square on this
particular night, kept herself busy editing an Armenian play,
written by her New Year's companion, Herand Markarian. Dr.
Mouradian, an Armenian immigrant, had braved this scene once
before, in 1964, her first year in America.


``I do what I enjoy in life and there's only one millennium,''
Dr. Mouradian said, undaunted by the crowded spectators' pen and
the hours of waiting, which had given her time to make new, young
friends. ``He's from Oregon,'' she said, her voice full of marvel.
``And he's from Alaska. And that one, next door, he's from Ohio.''


Looking down on the square at intervals through the day and
evening was Peter Jennings, the anchorman for ABC-TV's 24-hour
broadcast. He would stand pressed to the bulletproof windows of the
studio, staring at the mobs below. They, in turn, would wave to
him, seeking the perfect position in front of an ABC camera so they
could simultaneously wave to the folks back home.


The pantomime was a perfect metaphor. New Year's Eve here,
despite the extravagant performance _ dancers, puppets, souvenirs,
sound-and-light shows, commissioned by the Times Square Business
Improvement District _ is all about seeing and being seen. Thus the
run on camcorders at the electronics stores along Broadway. And the
posters (Mom, We Made It Fine, Trust Jesus, Sammy Loves Christine)
raised high to any camera nearby.


Yury Verduga, a salesman at an electronics store, repeated a
conversation he had had dozens of times. ``Camcorder? $199? Let me
see it! OK.'' Also a fast seller, Verduga said, were disposable
cameras.


Many people came prepared with supplies to keep them
comfortable, occupied and fed: beach chairs and blankets, chess
sets and mystery novels, and munchies of all kinds. One family
turned a carton upside down to make an ad hoc picnic table, then
unpacked a loaf of bread, jars of peanut butter and jelly and a
half gallon of milk.


The crowd for the most part was jolly. But not Shelley Brown,
from Maryland, who sat sniffling and hacking in a lawn chair,
wrapped head to toe in scarves and blankets. At her feet was an
overnight bag, stuffed with tissues and cough syrup.


Mrs. Brown had come down with the flu at the most inopportune of
times. But she didn't want to disappoint her husband, Ryan. ``I've
been talking about this for the last seven years,'' he said. ``I
grew up watching Dick Clark on television and thought it would be
so cool. We had to be here.''

