
Emma Woodhouse learned the hard way about the
dangers of makeovers. She tried to turn her simple friend, Harriet
Smith, into a girl with airs and aspirations. Too late, Jane
Austen's heroine realized she had altered Harriet for the worse,
from humble to vain.


Literature is rife with cautionary tales about experiments in
identity _ from Dorian Gray to Jay Gatsby to Tom Ripley, whose
murderous motto is ``Better a fake somebody than a real nobody.''


And yet, as we head into Clinton 2000, the vertiginous story
line remains the same: a carnival of makeovers, with inconstancy
all that is constant.


As President Clinton did a round of TV interviews last week to
try to give his image one more face lift, Linda and Monica sashayed
back onto the stage to flaunt their own transformations. And to add
to the craziness, Hillary, the woman of a thousand faces, was
displaying her dueling identities: first lady being hugged by the
president at the millennium kick-off ceremony and New York Senate
candidate whose best campaign move would be to dump the guy.


You almost had to feel sorry for the Proteus in Chief. He tried
to go deep and look far with Charlie Rose on ``60 Minutes II,''
talking about biomedical advances and the human genome project,
musing about 2050: ``What's this world going to look like?''


But while the president wondered what the world would look like,
the world wondered what Monica and Linda would look like. A
slimmed-down Ms. Lewinsky is starting her new career as a huckster
for Jenny Craig, which fattened the company's stock by 37 percent.


And, perhaps inspired by Paula Jones' exciting new nose, Mrs.
Tripp unveiled her exciting new head.


How weird: a scandal that investigated whether the president was
treating women as sex objects has ended with most of the women
involved getting makeovers to look sexier.


It was a shock, after Mrs. Tripp blessedly disappeared for
several months, to learn that she was just getting ready for her
close-up. With her utterly transformed visage and dark hair, she
recalled those mobsters who have to get new faces after they turn
rat finks.


``It looks like she's had a head transplant,'' Lucianne Goldberg
told The New York Post, which was reporting on a new National
Enquirer story.


Friends said that Mrs. Tripp, who was hurt by being portrayed by
John Goodman in a wig on ``Saturday Night Live,'' just wanted to be
pretty. David Letterman conceded the surgery had done wonders:
``She looks like a new man.''


The moral is one Jane Austen would appreciate: ugly is as ugly
does.


Mrs. Tripp released a statement on Friday saying that the
head-to-toe surgery and liposuction, performed by a Beverly Hills
knife-artist, was paid for by an unidentified private donor who
sympathized with her over the biting parodies.


``She just didn't feel good about herself and felt she could
feel a lot better and this is what she went and did,'' Bob
Angelotti, a Tripp spokesman, told The AP.


This woman nearly topples the republic and all she needs to feel
better about herself is fat vacuuming?


The impeachment chaos now boils down to three fashion questions:
Is there still a waiting list at Club Monaco for Monica's lip gloss
color? Were her online totes all sold out for Christmas? How much
weight has she lost?


Before Monica, it was considered retro to openly discuss the
weight and appearance of women. The day after her testimony at a
hearing in Maryland in Mrs. Tripp's wiretap case, The Washington
Post ran a story that began with what it considered to be the
essential fact: ``Thirty pounds.''


And at a Washington cocktail party last week, a gaggle of guests
talking to Kenneth Starr blithely speculated about the number of
pounds the former intern had shed.


We all believe in second acts and second chances _ even third
ones. We all believe in self-improvement. We all believe in the
possibility of genuine change and true conversion.


But this crowd has given personal development a bad name. The
problem is not metamorphosis. The problem is tactical and tacky
metamorphosis.


All the signals of American culture notwithstanding, the answer
is not to be found in appearances.

