
The Outback Bowl claimed the title of ``First Bowl
Game of the New Year'' by starting at 11:07 a.m, 4 minutes and 50
seconds ahead of the Cotton Bowl. However, the Cotton Bowl beat it
to the final buzzer. The first quarter here lasted 50 minutes, the
first half 112 minutes, and, including overtime, the game ate up a
whopping 4 hours and 8 minutes.


The Outback Bowl also set a standard for tightly-contested
matchups, becoming the first overtime game of the 2000s.


Sweet inspiration


Georgia's Hap Hines had an indirect impact on more than the
placekicking Saturday. He said that his girlfriend's mother made a
chocolate pie for quarterback Quincy Carter, and Carter told him
the pie made the difference for him.


The senior also revealed that he was gung-ho to kick the winning
field goal in overtime after Patrick Pass made a first down at the
Purdue 15, but he said, ``I've been around Coach (Jim) Donnan long
enough to know that his way's the right way and they did it just
perfectly.''


HInes came in three plays later for the 21-yard gamewinner.


Local hero


Purdue receiver Chris Daniels, who is from nearby Clearwater,
set a Purdue bowl game record with 12 receptions and finished the
season with 121 receptions for 1,232 yards, both school records.
``I heard stories that when he came in, he was kind of the deep
snapper and ninth-string receiver,'' said quarterback Drew Brees.
``He turned himself into one heck of a football player.''


Imperfect attendance


Outback Bowl officials announced that 54,059 tickets had been
distributed in 66,005-seat Raymond James Stadium, although there
were far more empty seats.


The sparse attendance was camouflaged since the red of the seats
matched the Bulldog colors. Because the game was not a sellout, it
was not shown in the Tampa area on ESPN.


No Sanks


After Jasper Sanks fumbled with 2:11 left in the first half, he
never returned to the game. Sanks wound up with six yards on four
carries, and also lost two yards on his lone reception.


Year of the Dog?


Purdue coach Joe Tiller said fate wasn't on his team's side. ``I
guess the new millennium didn't have us winning this game,'' he
said. ``Maybe in the Chinese New Year, this is the year of the
Bulldog, woof, woof, woof.''


Bad luck


Entering the Outback Bowl, Purdue's Travis Dorsch ranked third
in the Big 10 and 10th nationally with 18-of-28 field goals. He'd
also made all 37 of his extra point attempts. But he got off on the
wrong foot when he missed the extra point following the second
touchdown, then missed field goals of 40 yards (third quarter), 38
yards (fourth quarter) and 43 yards (overtime).


``It's going to be a long off-season,'' said the sophomore.
``I'll be watching a lot of tape and rededicating myself. As much
as I'm disappointed, I feel bad for those 17 seniors.''


In the charts


After missing the extra point, why did Purdue persist in trying
two-point conversions? The Boilermakers failed twice, when just one
point-after would have won the game.


``Because like a fool, we have these charts,'' said Tiller. ``We
went for two when the charts said we should go for two. I can't
fault the charts. In 30 years it hasn't let me down...too often.''


Long ball


Jonathan Kilgo, who stepped in for Wynn Kopp at punter, averaged
48 yards on three punts. That set a Georgia bowl record for highest
punting average, breaking the mark of 47.3 yards set by Bucky Dilts
in the 1977 Sugar Bowl.


Worst ad placement


Former Bulldogs basketball coach Tubby Smith's testimonial for a
homebuilder was placed on the same page as mug shots of the Georgia
football team in the official program.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

