
A Rough Night on the Town


Sean ``Puffy'' Combs has the indisputable ability to attract
attention. The rap impresario throws lavish parties, drapes himself
in furs and jewelry, dates movie star Jennifer Lopez and all but
begs people to look his way. Some say this is a job requirement for
a hip-hop star; others find it a tad excessive.


Last week Combs, 30, attracted more attention _ the unwanted
kind _ when he was arrested after an early-morning shootout in a
Manhattan nightclub. The arrest led to inevitable newspaper
photographs depicting Combs skulking away from a police station.


Police say a club patron taunted Combs by throwing a wad of
money at the multimillionaire. Combs and a young protege pulled out
guns, they say, but only the protege pulled his trigger. Three
bystanders were shot and wounded in the confusion that ensued,
while Combs and Ms. Lopez fled in a sports-utility vehicle that ran
11 red lights before being pulled over.


Police said they found a gun in the car that had not been fired,
but it was loaded _ and stolen. Combs, his driver and his bodyguard
were charged with criminal possession of a weapon, while his
protege was charged with attempted murder. Combs later held a news
conference to strongly deny having anything to do with the shootout
or with guns.


Still, the episode resurrected doubts about the rap star's
judgment. In April, for example, Combs and two associates beat up a
record executive who had angered him; he later pleaded guilty to a
violation. The arrest also comes at a time when record sales for
his Bad Boy Entertainment empire have slipped.


As for questions about Combs' performance as a role model, his
friend and business colleague, Andre Harrell, said, ``When you
judge Sean against his peers, he's not doing such a bad job.''


_ DAN BARRY


A Cold War Relic Signs Off


For schoolchildren in the 1950s or '60s, there were few sounds
more terrifying than the wail of an air raid siren. No matter that
it was only a test: The sound will forever conjure up visions of
Soviet jets and mushroom clouds.


But 50 years after cities from coast to coast installed the
early warning systems, the sirens have become little more than
annoying relics of the Cold War. This year, Baltimore will become
the latest city to abandon the system and its tests of 122 sirens
that blared from speakers around town each Monday at 1 p.m. A new
network of radio-controlled sirens, which do not require routine
testing, will be installed to alert people to impending natural
disasters or terrorist attacks.


Other cities have put the old systems to similar use.
Tornado-prone Omaha tests its system once a month, and San
Francisco, which is prone to earthquakes, runs a test every Tuesday
at noon. But why anyone would need a siren to tell them that there
had been an earthquake is an open question.


_ JANE FRITSCH


China Sentences 4 Members Of Spiritual Group


Sending a harsh message to followers of the Falun Gong spiritual
movement, Chinese authorities gave prison sentences ranging from 7
to 18 years to three men and a woman who were said to be top
organizers. Last summer the government declared the group an ``evil
cult'' after 10,000 members mounted an illegal demonstration in
Beijing.


Two of the sentences _ 18 years for one defendant and 16 years
for another _ were stiffer than those meted out to democracy
advocates in the last several years, a sign of how frightened the
government is of a movement that has attracted millions of
citizens.


_ ERIK ECKHOLM


Challengers Pull in Funds


Sen. John McCain and former Sen. Bill Bradley, the surging
presidential challengers, reported surprisingly strong fund-raising
totals for the final three months of the year, matching their
climbing poll ratings in New Hampshire.


McCain took in $6.1 million and Bradley received $8 million,
compared to only $4 million for Vice President Al Gore. Texas Gov.
George Bush continued his dominance of the money chase, collecting
$10 million in the fourth quarter of 1999 and entering the 2000
primary season with $31.4 million in the bank.


_ JOHN M. BRODER


Inquiry Into Kohl Funds


Prosecutors have started a criminal investigation into secret
bank accounts used by former German Chancellor Helmut Kohl to
collect and distribute at least $1 million in allegedly illegal
political contributions during the past decade.


The investigation marks a low point for Kohl, who was chancellor
from 1982 until 1998 and who engineered the reunification of
Germany. If found guilty of embezzlement or fraud, Kohl could
theoretically face a prison term of up to five years.


_ EDMUND L. ANDREWS


Violence Visits a Beatle


Anyone who was once a Beatle, even the ``quiet'' one, can never
fade away and live a simple life _ no matter how big the mansion,
how high the walls. George Harrison learned that in a spasm of
violence, one with echoes of John Lennon's murder nearly two
decades ago.


An intruder _ obsessed with the Beatles to the point of
believing they were witches _ broke into Harrison's home outside
London and stabbed him in the chest, also slightly injuring his
wife, Olivia. Harrison should recover from the resulting lung
injury, his surgeon said, in a matter of weeks.


_ HUBERT B. HERRING


(MORE)


nn

