
How do you mark the passage of 1,000 years of human
history? Simple, in this city of chronic gamblers and cold-eyed
oddsmakers: You head for the track.


At 12:45 a.m., as the last wisps of smoke from New Year's Eve
fireworks drifted away from the Happy Valley Racecourse, the crack
of a starter's gun set off the Millennium Cup. The Hong Kong Jockey
Club billed it as the first horse race of the 2000s, though rumors
swirled that it may have been edged out for first-in-the-world
status by post-midnight races in New Zealand and Australia.


Floral Joy won $110,000 from a total purse worth $200,000. It
was a good prize, but not extraordinary for a jockey club that
gener- ates more than $10 billion a season in bet- ting.


Such details did not dampen the spirits of more than 50,000
people who cheered wildly as Floral Joy streaked across the line
several lengths ahead of the next horse.


If a horse-race seems an offhand way to celebrate the ultimate
New Year's Eve, remember that strictly speaking, the new year does
not even arrive here until February 5, when Hong Kong and the rest
of the Chinese-speaking world will welcome the Year of the Dragon.


Considering that Hong Kong was celebrating someone else's
holiday, it threw quite a party. The city mounted a splashy
fireworks display at Happy Valley. At the stroke of midnight,
fireballs placed at 175-foot intervals around the track erupted
into a fountain of flames. An enormous illuminated dragon, which
the organizers described as the largest-ever, held court in the
infield.


For some Hong Kong residents, gambling seemed the only way to
celebrate the millennium. ``This is the perfect atmosphere for
racing,'' said Wilson Chan, a local businessman who lost money on
the first seven races of the evening, but was sure he would win it
all back on the main event.


Albert Cheng, a popular local radio-show host, said horse racing
symbolized stability in this former British colony, which reverted
to Chinese rule two years ago. ``Deng Xiaoping promised us that the
dancing would go on and the races would go on after the handover,''
Cheng said, paraphrasing a now-legendary remark by the Chinese
leader.


The Millennium Cup capped an evening of festivities that also
featured performances by several of Hong Kong's biggest film and
pop stars, including Jackie Chan, Chow Yun Fat, and Michelle Yeoh.
Chan served as the clown prince of the evening _ singing, dancing,
and mugging with all the cheerful exuberance he brings to roughing
up bad guys in films like ``Rumble in the Bronx.''


Of less interest to the star-crazed audience, Hong Kong Chief
Executive Tung Chee-hwa led a countdown of the final seconds of
1999. Tung then slipped away for the Hong Kong Convention Center,
where he caught a New Year's Eve concert by Whitney Houston.


Ms. Houston performed at one of the evening's hot tickets _ a
dusk-to-dawn millennium party hosted by Richard Li, the son of Hong
Kong billionaire, Li Ka-shing. The younger Li only decided to throw
the bash a month ago, and his organizers had worked frantically
around-the-clock to book marquee performers and ready a dinner for
1,000.


Across Victoria Harbor, the Regent Hotel vied for the status of
gaudiest party. At midnight, nearly 3,000 guests gazed out of the
hotel's floor-to-ceiling windows toward Hong Kong island, where the
already dramatic skyline had been transformed in a dizzying light
show. Brilliant hundred-foot, lighted dragons wrapped themselves
around buildings, while the numerals 2,000 flashed on several
skyscrapers.

