
... to Smith at a track meet.


Shortly after the Atlanta Olympics, Greene went to Hobson's
house and told him he was moving to Los Angeles to work with Smith
and HSI.


``It was very emotional,'' Greene remembers. ``I cried. He
cried. I guess it was like he sees me as a son, and I see him as a
father figure. Sometimes, though, when you're growing up, you have
to leave home someday to become a man.''


Hobson sees it much differently. He sees a slick lawyer and a
conniving coach manipulating a phenom who can carry a sports agency
into the 21st century.


``John Smith is a better recruiter than coach,'' Hobson says.
``That's no secret. If you go out there and run good, you're fine.
If you don't, they put you out. ... I remember we went down to San
Diego to train, and I drove Maurice up to Orange County. Emanuel
didn't have too much to say to me. But he managed to take Maurice
for a ride in his Mercedes-Benz and took him by his big old fancy
house, and told him, `This is what you can have.' ''


Emanuel Hudson says he did not recruit Greene _ or anyone else,
for that matter.


``We don't recruit,'' he says. ``Athletes come to us. John Smith
is the best sprint coach in the world. In 1996, HSI won more medals
in track and field than all but five countries.''


Greene and Hobson have patched up their nonworking relationship.
When Greene goes home, he and Hobson hit the casinos together. They
talk about everything except track and field.


``Watching Maurice now,'' Hobson says from his cramped office at
Kansas City Kansas Community College, ``watching Maurice break the
world record is like painting Picasso and someone else gets to sign
their name to the picture.'' Paying his dues


Greene's move to Los Angeles came at considerable sacrifice.


He and his father packed up Greene's 1995 GMC Jimmy and drove it
out to the West Coast. Greene moved in with J.B. Hill, a childhood
friend of Hobson's. At that time Nike supported Greene with a
$20,000-a-year income. On that, and money lent to him by HSI
teammates, Greene made his $300-a-month car payment, fed and
clothed himself and socialized.


``I thought it was kind of a joke,'' says Jackie Greene. ``I
thought he was teasing. I thought he was going to go out to
California and not really make it. I kept telling him that if it
doesn't work out, you can always come home.''


Greene stuck it out. In January of 1997 he moved into an HSI
teammate's one-bedroom apartment, which was closer to the UCLA
track where Smith trained his sprinters. Greene slept on a couch in
the living room.


Smith's training regimen exhausted Greene. The three-hour
sessions _ one hour lifting weights and two hours running _ took
another three hours to recover from. By the time Greene recovered,
he had spent countless hours watching film of his running style
with Smith.


``John basically made me learn my race,'' Greene says.
``Everyone can get out there and run fast, but it's the way you do
it. You must have a plan. We figured out the best way for me to run
100 meters. I had been just running all out from the start.


``Now I understand it's how you get to top-end speed that's
important. You try to get there as easy as possible. And you can
only hold it for about 10 or 15 meters. Then you decelerate. The
reason why it seems like at the end of the race I'm pulling away
from everybody is because when they're at top-end speed I haven't
even hit mine. I hit top-end speed around 70 to 75 meters.
Everybody else hits it around 45 to 50 meters.''


Greene was a quick study. In 1997 he won the 100-meter U.S.
nationals and the world championships. His earning potential
skyrocketed. He moved off the teammate's couch and out of his
apartment. He set his sights on becoming the fastest man in the
world and on the riches and fame that go along with it. The road
ahead


HSI, which was founded in early 1996, may be the perfect
launching pad for Greene's bid for sprint immortality. Hudson, who,
among other things, represents a Saudi Arabian royal family, and
Smith, who has traveled the world as a sprinter and coach since
1970, dream on a global scale.


They want to rule the world. And they know how to communicate
and connect with the brash, young, excitable Generation X athlete.
HSI's sprinters have been criticized for their over-the-top
on-track exuberance. Green loves to wag his tongue. Some of his
teammates love to strip their tops and flex their ripped upper
bodies. HSI sprinters have their own flag.


HSI's critics say the group may as well be rapper Master P's No
Limit army.


The critics will not argue, however, that HSI is the strongest
track and field management entity since Carl Lewis, manager Joe
Douglas and the Santa Monica Track Club completely controlled
international track and field. Using Lewis' star appeal and
leverage in the 1980s and early 1990s, Santa Monica dictated who
ran when, where and (some would argue) how fast.


HSI _ which also represents sprinters Ato Bolden, Jon Drummond,
Marie-Jose Perec, Inger Miller, pole vaulter Jeff Hartwig and
hurdler Larry Wade _ would like to use Greene in the same fashion.


If you want the world's fastest man at your televised track
meet, pay him $100,000 to show up and also pay six or seven of his
teammates $25,000 to compete against him and in other events.


Greene's value to HSI is incalculable. His success at the Sydney
Olympics, where he probably will compete for three gold medals
(100, 200 and 4-by-100 relay), is vital to HSI's rise.


Barring injury, great sprinters can have long careers. They
generally peak in their late 20s, which means Greene's best
Olympics might not be until 2004. He could still be running well in
2008.


HSI is preparing Greene for the long haul. In the middle of this
month Hudson, Smith and their athletes will fly to Las Vegas for a
weekend seminar.


``We'll have breakout sessions on every subject,'' Hudson says.
``I'll bring in a certified public accountant, a financial manager
from Dean Witter to talk about investments. A guy from ESPN will
come in, and so will NBC's producer for the Olympic Games. They'll
talk about how to handle the media. We'll prepare them to handle
anything.''


``The Franchise'' is being made Y2K ready. The world awaits.

The Los Angeles Daily News plans to move the following
entertainment stories for use by NYTimes News Service clients, AMs
and PMs of Jan. 2 and thereafter. For questions about stories,
contact the Daily News, (818) 713-3705.
	EAGLES -- Review of Eagles New Year's concert at Staples late
Friday. By Fred Shuster (Will move on the ``e'' entertainment
wire.)
The Los Angeles Daily News plans to move the following general
stories for use by NYTimes News Service clients, AMs and PMs of
Jan. 2 and thereafter. For questions about stories, contact the
Daily News, (818) 713-3705.
	PARTIES-FIZZLE (Los Angeles) -- As the world's greatest cities
celebrated the New Year into Saturday morning at spectacular and
ornate events, the entertainment capital of the world's official
millennium extravaganza fizzled and flopped like a third-rate
suburban dinner theater show. The lighting of the famed Hollywood
sign had been sold for months by Mayor Richard Riordan and the
city's cultural commissioner as a once-in-a-lifetime blockbuster
event, featuring fireworks, lasers, skywriters, and even
parachuting daredevils. By Greg Gittrich and Rick Orlov (Will move
on the ``n'' California and the ``a'' national news wires.)
	Y2KGLITCH-FIX (Los Angeles) -- Wrap-up on Y2K glitches and
efforts to fix them. By Harrison Sheppard and Rick Orlov (Will move
on the ``n'' California and the ``a'' national news wires.)
	Y2KCOPS-QUIET (Los Angeles)-- The steaming hot pizzas and cold
sodas had just arrived at the Los Angeles police Foothill Division
on New Year's Eve when the call came in: An officer was in trouble
and needed help in North Hollywood. More than a dozen officers
rushed to their cars, but before they could even leave the parking
lot, the officer canceled the call. It was the same across Los
Angeles, as the Foothill officers prepared for the worst, but spent
the night cruising unusually empty, peaceful streets and watching
New Year's celebrations on television. By Jason Kandel (Will move
on the ``n'' California and the ``a'' national news wires.)
	GUNS-NEWYEAR (Los Angeles) -- Gunfire in the air, an L.A.
tradition, continues despite satellite surveillance that registered
thousands of fireworks explosions as shots. By David Baker (Will
move on the ``n'' California and the ``a'' national news wires.)
