
As the shepherd to 2.4 million parishioners and a man whose
utterances are closely monitored, the archbishop of New York has
historically had the tallest pulpit in the Roman Catholic Church in
the United States.


By nature of the position, he can be the Vatican's leading
spokesman in America, a figure whom foreign dignitaries feel they
must meet and a religious leader whose views carry great weight
among other faiths.


Cardinal John O'Connor, the archbishop since 1983, is likely to
retire soon, and speculation and hope are swirling about whom Pope
John Paul II will appoint to this post. Many who speak about it do
so only on background.


The men most often cited as potential successors share certain
characteristics. They are mostly archbishops, in their late 50s and
60s, with experience of important posts in Rome. They include the
archbishop of St. Louis, a man with strong diplomatic skills, who
is considered close to the pope; the head of the Newark
archdiocese, one of the most ethnically diverse in the church, and
the archbishop of the American military, who has long enjoyed a
close relationship with O'Connor. A handful of others, some with
close ties to New York, round out the list.


The archbishop of New York, said the Rev. Thomas Reese, editor
of the Jesuit magazine America, really does the equivalent of four
full-time jobs: administrator and fund-raiser, national Catholic
spokesman, leader among bishops and consultant on American issues
to the pope.


Inevitably, perhaps, O'Connor, through his outspokenness on
issues as diverse as abortion and immigrants' rights, has
established a tone some people now associate with the office
itself. He has redefined the job, said George Weigel, author of a
biography of Pope John Paul II, ``Witness to Hope'' (HarperCollins,
1999), and a senior fellow at the Ethics and Public Policy Center
in Washington. Like the pope himself, the cardinal has ``recovered
a much more ancient notion of the bishop as an evangelist,'' Weigel
said in an interview.


But the cardinal has indicated that he expects to retire soon.
Last summer, he underwent brain surgery for a tumor. And he will
turn 80 on Jan. 15, the age at which, by church law, he loses his
vote in the College of Cardinals, the Vatican body that elects the
next pope. In November, the cardinal wrote what sounded like a
farewell letter to American bishops.


Catholics in the 4,700-square-mile archdiocese _ which includes
Manhattan, Staten Island, the Bronx and seven counties to the north
_ do not lack opinions about the qualities an archbishop should
bring to the job. In a New York Times poll conducted from Nov. 29
to Dec. 5, Catholics in the archdiocese said the next archbishop
should be compassionate and humane, help the poor and the homeless,
and show strong leadership.


Interviews with New York Catholics turned up similar sentiments.
``I want a direct, outspoken and very humanitarian leader,'' said
Lorraine Cortes-Vazquez, president of the Hispanic Federation, a
network of nonprofit organizations. ``One who is loving, clear,
extremely responsible and holds people accountable, but who is very
interested in hearing other perspectives.''


Mario Cuomo, who endured the cardinal's criticism as a Catholic
politician who supported abortion rights while governor, said, ``If
Catholics all knew about Cardinal O'Connor, they would want someone
very much like him.'' He said the cardinal had been ``perhaps the
strongest'' pro-labor archbishop in New York's history.


(BEGIN OPTIONAL TRIM)


Mary Ellen McDonnell, a parishioner at St. Boniface Church in
Brooklyn, said she favored the idea of an archbishop with the
ability to listen: ``The church does not work by consensus, and I
understand that, but to be an effective leader, one must be
sensitive to differences, especially in New York.''


And one priest said ``the big thing'' the next archbishop ought
to have is administrative skills.


Father Reese said that if one added up what Catholics wanted in
a New York archbishop, ``it ends up being a saint with an MBA from
Harvard Business School.''


(END OPTIONAL TRIM)


The potential successor whose name comes up the most often is
Archbishop Justin Rigali of St. Louis, a city the pope visited for
two days in January 1999, his only stop in the United States after
a pastoral visit to Mexico. Prior to his appointment in 1994,
Archbishop Rigali, 64, earned a doctorate in canon law and spent
three decades in Rome, much of that time in the Vatican's
diplomatic offices. Not surprisingly, he is credited with excellent
diplomatic skills. Like Cardinal O'Connor, he is viewed as a church
conservative but is considered to be more reserved.


And then there is Archbishop Theodore McCarrick of Newark, 69, a
native of New York City who served as an auxiliary bishop in the
archdiocese. Among American bishops, he has a reputation as a
leader on international issues. He travels widely and has pushed
for debt relief for the world's poorest nations. People in the
church describe him as gregarious and accessible.


He is fluent in Spanish, and his fluency would be an asset in
New York, where Hispanics constitute 36 percent of the church's
parishioners. He has a doctorate in sociology.


Another prelate whose name often comes up is a man long close to
Cardinal O'Connor, Archbishop Edward O'Brien. He is head of the
archdiocese for the military services, the Washington-based
jurisdiction over chaplains. O'Brien, 60, was vice chancellor and
director of communications in the New York archdiocese, and has
experience as a former rector of seminaries in New York and Rome.
He is described as quiet but personable. He, too, has a doctorate,
in moral theology.


(MORE)


nn

