
Cuba did not celebrate the start of the third
millennium Saturday.


This is not a political statement, even if the Communist Party's
refusal to fade away after the collapse of the Soviet Union or the
continuing U.S. trade embargo make Cuba feel like a time capsule
crammed with dowager buildings and revolutionary slogans. It is
only an acknowledgement _ made on the front page of Granma, the
official newspaper _ that since the Christian calendar began with
the Year One, the new millennium actually starts on Jan. 1 next
year.


So while the rest of the world jumps the gun on the party, Cuba,
Communist or otherwise, ever insistent on following its own
political and social path, will linger in the 20th century for one
more year.


Contrary to rumors, neither Madonna nor the Three Tenors showed
up in Havana on Friday night. There were no fireworks or huge
crowds cheering on the stroke of 12, a result of both tradition and
politics. Cubans traditionally spend New Year's Eve at home with
friends and family, waiting until midnight to toss buckets of water
out the window in a ritual that symbolizes saying goodbye to the
past year's bad luck and hard times.


And ever since Jan. 1, 1959, when the dictator Fulgencio Batista
fled Havana, the New Year is more important for commemorating the
day when cheering throngs embraced Fidel Castro and his triumphant
revolutionaries.


While Cuba officially remains on the verge of the millennium,
its people have grown accustomed to the feeling of being on the
cusp of a new era. They have learned to improvise and survive in an
economy that, despite modest growth, has yet to lift their family
situations. So it was that an elderly artist chuckled as he
reflected on whether the year 2000 held any special meaning for
him.


``Here, every day is the turn of the century,'' he said. ``The
problem is tomorrow. Our preoccupation is tomorrow. What problems
are we going to have tomorrow?''


Recent weeks have brought contrasting flashes of yesterday and
tomorrow. In numbers not seen since the early days of the
revolution, tens of thousands of people have marched in boisterous
rallies demanding the return of Elian Gonzalez, the 6-year-old
refugee who is at the center of a custody dispute between relatives
in Miami and his father in Cuba. In the millennium's last Cold War
battle, some 100,000 protesters in the city of Santiago revived
visions of the old revolutionary fervor on Thursday with their
broadsides against American imperialism and their tributes to
Castro.


``Cuba is in a time warp,'' said a diplomat who spoke on
condition of anonymity. ``In the 21st century Cuba is not going to
have Fidel. He is not going to be around forever. There is going to
be a change and we would like to see it occur in a way that assures
democracy and progress.''


But reminiscent of the days before it started importing
revolution, Cuba is eagerly importing tourists who sip daiquiris in
new hotels or trot out their best high school Spanish as they
bargain down the price of bongos or portraits of Che Guevara.


Three hundred Italian and Canadian tourists ushered in the New
Year under the dome of the stately Capitol building, which is used
as a museum and convention center, feasting on champagne and
lobster under the stoic gaze of a towering statue that represents
the republic.


In Old Havana, several hundred tourists paid $100 each to dine
under the stars in the plaza outside the cathedral, ringed by
twinkling wreaths hanging from the balconies. As tourists, some in
black tie and slinky gowns, roamed about, ordinary Cubans without
the cash to join the bash looked on curiously from the roped-off
entrances to the plaza.


``What can I believe?'' said Yordanka Hernandez, who lives in a
cul-de-sac off the plaza. ``They should do this for us, the Cubans.
Instead, this is for foreigners. As a Cuban, imagine what I think.
We earned it. We're struggling. Struggling for Elian.''


(MORE)


nn

