
Already threatening to cut off American corporate
dollars that bankroll the Olympics, critics in Congress now are
concerned about the increasing amount of federal funds going to
prepare U.S. cities to host the Games.


The government plans to spend $1.4 billion on the 2002 Salt Lake
City Winter Games, more than twice the $605 million spent on the
much larger Atlanta Olympics in 1996, congressional investigators
reported recently. Only $75 million in federal funds went to Los
Angeles for the 1984 Games.


``These funds are spent whether the Games have been won by
legitimate efforts or the questionable practices of payoffs and
special favors that have already been amply documented,'' said Rep.
John Dingell (D-Mich.).


Dingell and Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) requested the report from
the General Accounting Office, the congressional auditors. The
senators questioned whether the government should spend so much to
support the upcoming Salt Lake City Olympics, which has been marred
by a vote-buying scandal.


McCain has held two Olympic hearings in the Senate, one on the
controversial bid city selection process and the other on doping.
He plans a third early this year to review the reforms established
by the International Olympic Committee last month.


``There is clearly a total lack of control and accountability,''
McCain said. ``Until this report, no one had a clue how much money
was being spent and on what.''


Indeed, until the GAO study, there never had been a
comprehensive accounting of federal tax dollars spent on Olympic
Games held in the United States.


The GAO found 24 government organizations helped underwrite the
1996 Atlanta Games. An estimated $184 million was used for direct
support of the planning and staging of the Games, including about
$92 million for security and safety.


Another $421 million was spent for infrastructure improvements
to the city, such as public housing, transit, highway and other
capital projects. Most of that money would have eventually been
provided to the city, but the spending was accelerated to meet the
Olympic deadline, according to state and federal officials.


However, some of the funds, such as $17 million spent on Olympic
buses and $22 million on the Olympic whitewater venue in
Copperhill, Tenn., would never have left the federal bank had it
not been necessary to get Atlanta ready for the Games.


Among the biggest-spending departments:


The Department of Transportation was the city's biggest
benefactor, pouring some $394 million into accelerated roads,
bridges and transit projects, according to the GAO study.


The Justice department anted up $23 million for security and
safety, including 1,200 agents and staff of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, 150 U.S. marshals, 130 Immigration and
Naturalization Service staff to assist processing international
visitors and a $4 million grant to pay Atlanta police overtime.


The Department of Defense spent $39 million on everything from
security to construction of the Savannah River Walk near the
Olympic yachting venue.


``Some of these federal expenditures may well be necessary, but
there may also be a fair amount of goldplating,'' said Dingell, the
ranking Democrat on the House Commerce Committee.


IOC President Juan Antonio Samaranch testified before the
Commerce committee's oversight and investigations subcommittee last
month about the reforms his organization adopted to avoid a repeat
of the vote-buying scandal that rocked the Olympic movement last
year.


Those reforms included the establishment of a new ethics
commission, a ban on IOC visits to bid cities, the addition of 15
athletes to the IOC and new rules on age limits and terms of
office.


``Unfortunately, the most important IOC reform _ the
establishment of an independent ethics commission _ is an
incomplete work in progress lacking in specifics,'' Dingell said.
``Until ethics rules and procedures are in place, I cannot say that
the IOC is reformed.''


Indeed, Congressional interest in the Olympics has not waned
since the multimillion-dollar influence-peddling scheme tied to the
awarding of the Salt Lake City Games was made public in December
1998. Rep. Fred Upton, R-Mich., chairman of the House subcommittee,
said he wants quarterly reports from the IOC on the ethics
commission's progress. He said he, too, may hold another hearing
next year if he doesn't think the panel is serious about routing
out wrongdoing.


Former Sen. Howard Baker is a member of the commission, which he
says will be responsible for investigating any future allegations
of improprieties by IOC members. He testified that the commission
is still ``a work in progress,'' but said he was optimistic that
the IOC was serious about preventing future scandals.


Still, his assurances weren't enough to call off critics on
Capitol Hill.


``Tax dollars are going to host cities at the expense of other
programs,'' McCain said. ``How many important public safety
projects and other programs in other cities and states were
postponed or canceled so that these cities could put on an
Olympics?''


Of the $605 million spent on Atlanta, less than 20 percent, or
only $104 million had been specifically appropriated for an Olympic
purpose.


Despite the hefty tab for the Atlanta Games, the lawmakers were
even more concerned about the anticipated $1.4 billion bill related
to the Salt Lake City Games.


About $1.1 billion will be spent for transportation projects
such as highways and a commuter railway that probably would have
been built anyway, the report said. Another $272 million will be
spent solely for the planning or operation of the 2002 Games,
including about $200 million by the FBI and other agencies for
safety and security.


The Winter Olympics are much smaller, and traditionally less
expensive. But as the report showed, the federal government is
sinking still more money into staging the event.


``When a city wins the Games, it is effectively obligating the
federal taxpayer to underwrite a wide range of activities, from
infrastructure and transportation projects to security,'' Dingell
said. ``But until this point, there has been no central accounting
for federal spending on the Olympics, and there has been no
conscious decision by the taxpayers or their representatives to
spend the money on the Games. This needs to change.''


Some eight U.S. cities have begun work on bids for the 2012
Games.


Story Filed By Cox Newspapers

