
With a new year and a new America's Cup
challenger round looming, Paul Cayard gazed out over the Viaduct
Basin.


In the foreground were 60 huge spectator yachts that had chosen
central Auckland's new marina for their millennium celebration. In
the background were the America's Cup boat sheds, temporary homes
to the six challenger syndicates and to Team New Zealand, the Cup
holder, which is busily biding time until February, when the
America's Cup finals begin.


The challengers must first sort themselves out, and they were to
restart that process in the Louis Vuitton Cup semifinals, which
begin Sunday.


``Awesome,'' said Cayard, the skipper of America One, surveying
the scene. ``There has been no other venue like this in the
America's Cup. Newport used to be like this a bit. Look at this
display of wealth here in front of us. That in itself is a show,
and it's nice that it's mixed in with the Cup. If you're a sailing
enthusiast, this obviously is the mecca of the sport for the next
couple of months.''


How long the gifted, driven Cayard and his syndicate get to
enjoy the atmosphere will be determined in the next two weeks. The
remaining challengers are America One, America True and Stars &AMP;
Stripes, all from the United States; Prada Challenge from Italy;
Nippon Challenge from Japan; and, most surprising, Le Defi Francais
from France, which managed to nudge past the New York Yacht Club's
Young America in the third round.


Now the scoreboard is set back to zero, and each of the six
semifinalists will race twice against the others over a 10-day
period that could extend beyond that if the mercurial Auckland
weather does not cooperate. The top two teams will advance to the
Vuitton final that will produce Team New Zealand's opponent.


``I think there are at least five of the competitors, if not all
six, that can win any given day given a few breaks,'' Cayard said,
``and there are plenty of opportunities for breaks out here. The
wind is real fickle and shifty. It's a tough racecourse, so you
can't take anything for granted. It's not like if you have a little
speed edge you are going to win for sure.''


``For me, this is the riskiest part of the whole event,'' he
said of the six-team semifinals. ``In light of the conditions, I
would have much preferred a situation where we were racing with
only four semifinalists and having a best-of-seven against just one
guy. I think that would give the stronger teams more likelihood of
prevailing. Here you could get caught out a couple of times, and
that could make all the difference.''


The favorites are the well-funded, two-boat campaigns of Prada,
Nippon and America One. But America True, the coed team headed by
Dawn Riley, has spent the last two and a half months defying
predictions.


``I guess we don't feel surprised, because we always rated
ourselves higher than other people rated ourselves,'' said America
True's skipper, John Cutler, whose team was one of the first to set
up shop in Auckland. ``The preparation in our program was done at
such a higher level than what people thought it was. It does feel
good to prove everybody wrong. But now it's different. Everything
we've done before doesn't count anymore.''


Though the first three rounds were hardly lacking in drama, with
boats sustaining serious damage in the sometimes punishing
conditions, they were atypically low on rhetoric. That changed last
week with Nippon's decision to practice with Team New Zealand.


America True was only the latest challenger to decline the
invitation to spar with the Kiwis, but Nippon's hard-charging
Australian skipper, Peter Gilmour, lobbied aggressively for the
opportunity. His competitors, particularly Stars &AMP; Stripes'
on-shore head, Dennis Conner, responded with some sharp words.


``I've been around 20 years, and I can tell you we didn't sail
against the potential challengers in 1974 or in 1980, and we didn't
sail against them in 1983 or 1995,'' said Conner, who has won the
Cup three times as a skipper. ``It's surprising. You have to ask
yourself what's in this for Peter. Maybe he doesn't think he's
going to the America's Cup, and he wanted to get a picture of the
Japanese boat sailing against Team New Zealand.''


Conner, who was sitting at the same table with the other
skippers at a news conference, then turned to Gilmour and said,
``Maybe Peter, if you're steering the New Zealand boat on the
defense in 2003, maybe we'll understand.''


As the audience began to ``ooh'' like a boxing crowd after a
well-landed punch, Conner grinned and said, ``Oops, I shouldn't
have said that.''


Gilmour said: ``This is how a lot of serious prejudices and
misunderstandings build up in different cultures. New Zealand is a
very competitive and great sporting team and should be respected as
such. They don't need to be treated as pariahs.''


The significance of the practice session was diluted because
Gilmour chose to race in the boat he used in the third round but
will not use, surprisingly, in the semifinals. The New Zealanders
also practiced with what is considered their slower boat.


``Look, I'm sure we helped them,'' Gilmour said. ``But I believe
we helped ourselves more.''


Nippon is not the only team to abandon its newer boat for the
semifinals. Prada is also switching from ITA 48, the boat it used
in the last round robin, back to ITA 45, with which it dominated
the first two rounds. Cayard and America One will use their new
boat _ USA 61 _ which has yet to see action here.

