
In the bleary afterglow of the pulsating mass party
in Times Square, New Yorkers awoke Saturday to a city that in the
first hours of the year 2000 looked and acted pretty much the way
it did in 1999. Things worked. The terrorists stayed home.


Gerard Vitti, a maintenance worker who had to report to his job
at Manhattan Plaza at 6 a.m. and thus slept as the 1990s expired,
got up and welcomed the 2000s by testing an electrical outlet in
his Bronx apartment. Sure enough, it worked. He flicked on the
radio. No blackouts. No bombs. Just another workday.


``Everything was fine, so I hopped on the subway,'' he said,
noting that it too clacked down the tracks just the way it did all
through the 1990s. ``It has turned out to be a normal Saturday
morning, more or less.''


In the wake of a hyperbolic night when so many fidgety people
did their cork popping in their own homes, New York stepped into
the new year a little sleepier, a little messier, but with any
throbbing headaches relieved considerably by the excess of
normalcy.


Times Square itself, immobilized for a day by celebrators and
cheer, looked untidy but intact. Police estimates of the turnout of
possibly 2 million people for the elongated extravaganza was
quadruple the conventional New Year's Eve crush. And yet the
merrymaking, watched carefully by unprecedented might from the
city's police force, proceeded with exceptional bonhomie and
minimal reports of misconduct. The lights still shone and no
terrorists intruded on the gaiety.


Early Saturday, under dank skies, a new morning shift of people
who couldn't let go of their celebratory urges continued to wander
into the party scene. Steve Delladonna, 26, of Mamaroneck, and Tara
Berrigan, 25, of Niagra Falls, got to Times Square around 4:30 p.m.
Friday, and there was already no room. Unable to edge close enough
to see anything worthwhile, they retreated to their hotel at 7:30
and settled for watching the ball drop on television. At 8 Saturday
morning, they finally got to really see Times Square. ``I've never
seen so much garbage in my whole life,'' Ms. Berrigan said.


In an early morning display of self-congratulation at the city's
crisis center, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani heaped praise on New York for
being, in effect, very un-New York _ cheerful, well-behaved,
polite. Summing up the celebration, the mayor said everyone ``did
it happily, they did it with a great deal of enthusiasm and
optimism, but they did it in a way in which they didn't do any harm
to each other, any harm to property.''


(STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS)


(MORE)


nn

