
Basketball players added muscles and multimillion-dollar sneaker
contracts. American yachts lost the America's Cup, gained it back,
then lost it again. Grass all but disappeared on tennis courts. The
natural stuff almost became extinct in baseball and football before
injuries and nostalgia spurred its comeback. Lights finally shone
at Wrigley Field. Europe became a major talent pool for the
National Hockey League; golf and tennis benefited from America's
diversity. What could happen next, on and off the field? A look at
nine sports.


Auto Racing


The Indy 500? Forget about it. Instead, it will be the Indy
5000, with portions in air and over sea as the Jetsons Age finally
arrives.


The Formula One Series will remain an elite and internationally
dominated circuit, but new engineering-minded billionaires and
everyday Autobahn veterans will challenge the corporate teams.


Once the salvation of Southern moonshiners, NASCAR will run year
round around the globe, as sort of a nostalgia show. London, Tokyo,
Rome and Tehran all will have gigantic tracks to play host to
expanding fields. Drivers will hail from places far from the South,
like Russia, Ecuador or Tibet.


NASCAR marketers will also be the first to give their ubiquitous
sponsors and action junkie fans what they want: on-track dogfights
that result in spectacular crashes. Replacement cars and, if
necessary, replacement drivers, will be ready to roar from the pit.
It will be a huge television ratings hit and _ throwing in
parimutuel betting on race day _ will replace baseball as America's
national pastime.


_ JOE DRAPE


Baseball


In its second century, Major League Baseball could experience
new developments, and it could be business as usual. After the
first or second season of the new century, for example, depending
on when the current labor agreement expires, baseball could face
its ninth work stoppage in 30 years.


Salaries and offense will continue to escalate. The owners will
try again but fail again to curtail player salaries; the disparity
between star salaries and wages for everyone else will continue to
grow. Some inroads will be made in dealing with the disparity
between high-revenue and low-revenue clubs.


When games routinely end with scores like 15-12, officials will
grudgingly take steps to help the downtrodden pitchers, raising the
mound a few inches from the 10-inch height that was legislated in
1968 and expanding the strike zone by enforcing the borders
provided in the rule book. Pitchers will throw fewer called balls,
resulting in shorter games.


The World Series will become a true World Series when the major
leagues add teams in such countries as Mexico, Japan and Australia.
But an even more compelling event will be the World Cup of
Baseball, involving countries from all over the world, with major
league players competing for the countries of their birth.


On an individual basis, Ken Griffey Jr. will challenge Hank
Aaron's career record of 755 home runs, and later in the century
Trey Griffey will pursue his father's total. But no one will
approach Cal Ripken's streak of 2,632 consecutive games played. Joe
DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak will also stand.


_ MURRAY CHASS


Golf


The next 100 years hold intriguing possibilities for golf. The
sport continues to grow in popularity, and Tiger Woods has become
perhaps the world's most famous active athlete. Woods' career will
be a key for golf in the early 21st century, because if he remains
dominant for the next 10 to 15 years, his star power will only
attract more fans and more corporate dollars.


Expect golf's global appeal to broaden, with men and women from
all parts of the world winning major championships. And there will
be more youngsters like Woods, Sergio Garcia, and Se Ri Pak ready
to win as professionals before they turn 21.


But much of golf's future will depend on how well it capitalizes
on its current strength. For golf to continue to grow, it must
become more affordable and more accessible, giving more youngsters
from diverse backgrounds a chance to play regularly and to become
part of the game's future.


_ CLIFTON BROWN


Horse Racing


By the time the century turns, betting on a horse race will be a
24-hour affair and as easy as rolling over on a television remote
control. Click _ handicapping information appears on the screen for
races from Australia, England, Japan and the sport's new capital,
Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Click _ bet. Click _ view race. Click
_ grab the winning payoff from the ATM-like slot at the bottom of
the TV screen.


Descendants of Sheik Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum will have
realized the trailblazing horseman's dream of making sand rather
than bluegrass the icon of the Sport of Kings, or should we say
Sheiks? Geneticists will have helped by cloning faster, more
durable racehorses in a never-ending assembly line.


In the United States, only New York, California, Florida and
Kentucky will feature live racing because the couch potato culture
will be firmly rooted. America will be slow to embrace cloned
horses and will lose ground because in-breeding will have thinned
capable stock.


Riders will have support teams _ nutritionists, psychiatrists
and trainers _ dedicated to keeping them at the feathery weight of
114 pounds. There'll be a lot of hiring and firing. But best of
all, technology will allow bettors to match fields from around the
globe in virtual races. One thing will remain the same _ there will
be more losing tickets than winning ones.


_ JOE DRAPE


Football


The year is 2014, and NFL Commissioner Bill Parcells speaks at
the annual state-of-the-league address. His main topic: the number
of changes that took place in what was a hectic year for
professional football.


``The year 2014 will be remembered as one of the busiest in
decades,'' the commissioner's opening statement begins. ``We've
expanded to 35 teams, with a franchise in Salt Lake City. The new
technology that allows fans watching the game at home on television
to listen in on actual huddles has been a rousing success. Our
first woman head coach went 18-2 in the regular season and we had
the first 70-yard field goal.''


A question from the news media: ``Commissioner Parcells, the Los
Angeles Warriors just signed John ``Millisecond'' Flash to a
seven-year, $200 million contract. He was recently timed in the
40-yard dash at 3.99, making him the fastest human being ever. And
the Giants signed 400-pound offensive lineman Jessie
``Cholesterol'' Smith to a long-term deal. So my question is, are
players becoming too big and too fast?''


``I'm glad you asked that,'' Parcells replies. ``Lookit, 14
years ago I traded Vinny Testaverde so I could move up in the draft
and trade for Peter Warrick, who turned out to be the best receiver
Florida State ever had. And we now know the Ray Lucas-to-Warrick
combination is the best ever. My point is, the game evolves, it
gets faster, but it always stays the same great game.''


``Commissioner, there is talk among ownership that you want to
return to coaching. Is that true?''


``No, no, no. Bill Belichick is the general manager and coach.
He's won three Super Bowls with the Jets. Coaching is a young man's
game. I retired from coaching at the end of the 2000 season.


``But there is one thing I am considering. How does President
Parcells sound to you guys?''


_ MIKE FREEMAN


Basketball


Young players flooding the NBA continue to be a source of
consternation between the owners and players, enough so that it
influences labor negotiations in 2005.


Eventually, Isiah Thomas, owner of the Continental Basketball
Association, opens up farm teams within a 200-mile radius of each
NBA team that cater to players between the ages of 17 and 20.


Still dogged by quality-of-play problems, league officials allow
zone defenses to be employed for the first time in league history.
On the night of the rule change, Allen Iverson equals Wilt
Chamberlain's 100-point game.


_ MIKE WISE


(MORE)


nn

