
Although it had seen many huge crowds over the
years, for inaugurations, Fourth of July fireworks, protests and
parades, never in memory had the Mall in the nation's capital drawn
multitudes for New Year's. But on this mild winter night with a
lovely sunset,hundreds of thousands of people here thronged to
the Mall for a long-planned celebration on the last New Year's Eve
of the 1900s.


``It's a very friendly crowd,'' Sgt. Frank R. Onolfi of the
U.S.Park Police said as afternoon turned to evening. But by shortly
after 10 p.m., there were so many people trying to get close to the
Lin- coln Memorial, the focal point of the observ- ances where
President Clinton was about to speak, that sections of temporary
fencing were pushed down along Constitution Ave- nue. Multitudes
stormed through the gaps instead of being funneled through several
security points, where the police had been checking for alcohol.


Police officers saw that the throngs could not be repulsed
without the risk of serious injury or disorder, so they let the
people come through. Another line of fences stopped them close to
the reflecting pool, and the police said order was soon restored.
No serious injuries were reported.


Early in the evening, it was clear that the crowd was befitting
of a cosmopolitan city and a changing America. The celebration drew
people of different languages and ac- cents, from other countries,
from all over the United States and from Washington it- self.
People who live in the District tend to be blase about motorcades
and potentates and ceremonies, but many Washingtonians thought
Friday night's event was something they could not miss.


``We normally stay home on New Year's, but we had to see the
millennium celebration,'' Thea Anderson said. She and her husband,
Clarence, who have lived in the District for 27 years, were at
first a little nervous about venturing out, given the talk of
danger, however remote. But in the end, they took the Metro
downtown and were glad they did.


Patrick and Jane Wilson of Greenville, S.C., arrived Friday
morning, early enough to get close to President Clinton at an event
before midday. Mrs. Wilson was delighted to get pictures of the
president, and the couple were pleased with the crowd-control
measures, which they found efficient without being oppressive.


``Everything is so laid-back,'' Mrs. Wilson said. ``There's no
pushing or shoving.''


The events of Friday made the Wilsons feel at home again, in a
sense. They were out of the country for several years _ she travels
a lot for business _ and their return has not been altogether
pleasant. They said they had noticed heightened suspicions at
airports and other gathering places, and she has had to explain why
she has been to Kuwait.


Many people at the Mall Friday night wore party hats. One
merchandise tent offered ``millennium celebration'' certificates.
An entrepreneur hawked T-shirts labeled, ``I survived Y2K.'' The
going rate was $5.


For a relative few, the evening called for tuxedos and formal
gowns _ proper attire for the White House Millennium Dinner, where
the first family greeted guests before leaving for fireworks
festivities on the Mall.


Joggers threaded their way nonchalantly through the Mall
celebrators. There was lots of room, the Mall being one of the
jewels that make this a pedestrian-friendly city.


For all the anticipation, some people were just not getting it.
Connie Liang brought her children _ one 18-months-old, the other
3-years-old. ``My children are too young to remember this,'' she
said, ``but at least they will be able to say they were here.''

