
Ray Hubbard, a television producer and broadcasting executive
and a pioneer in the medium, died on Dec. 27 in Kenwood, Calif. He
was 75 and had been suffering from Parkinson's disease.


Hubbard was vice president for programming and production at
Post-Newsweek Stations in Washington, the broadcast group of The
Washington Post, from 1969 to 1976. Before that he was the national
programming manager and executive producer of public affairs for
Group W, the Westinghouse Broadcasting Co. in New York, where he
helped to develop the Steve Allen, Mike Douglas, Merv Griffin and
Regis Philbin shows and ``P.M. East'' with Mike Wallace.


At Westinghouse, Hubbard was responsible for programs including
``Discovery,'' a 13-part series on contemporary art produced with
the San Francisco Museum of Art; ``Black Culture,'' 65 half-hour
programs created with Morgan State University in Baltimore; and
``Children's Spectaculars,'' a series of hourlong dramatic shows
featuring Zero Mostel, Boris Karloff, Claire Bloom and others. He
also produced a variety of specials, including the Benny Goodman
show at the American pavilion at the 1958 World's Fair in Brussels,
Belgium.


An advocate of educational children's fare, Hubbard worked with
local school systems and hired writers to create study guides, one
of the earliest examples of the interactive use of television in
learning. He was responsible for ``Harambee,'' the first daily
scheduled black culture-oriented program on American television,
and ``Everywoman,'' the first prime-time women's program.


Upon retiring from Post-Newsweek, Hubbard produced ``Special
Delivery,'' five half-hour programs for children about living with
disabilities. He then established Unicorn Projects Inc., a
nonprofit production company.


Hubbard was the recipient of major broadcasting awards including
the Emmy, Dupont and George Foster Peabody Awards.


Born in Los Angeles, he graduated from the California College of
Arts and Crafts in Oakland in 1942 and earned a master's degree in
theater and communications from Stanford University in 1951.


He is survived by his wife, Marion; three sons, Bruce and
Stephen, of Pasadena, Calif., and Gregory of Wells, Maine; and two
grandchildren.

